







HE

AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS





AMAZON AND MADEIRA
RIVERS ,

SKETCHES AND DESCRIPTIONS FROM THE

NOTE-BOOK OF AN EXPLORER

BY .

FRANZ ‘KELLER

NOINERR

New EpIrIoN

WITH SIXTY-EIGHT ILLUSTRATIONS ON WOOD

PHILADELPHIA
J. B. LIPPINCOTT AND CO
1875



LONDON:
PRINTED BY VIRTUE AND CO.,
CITY ROAD.

a


4

AEB

PREPAC E-

jaz
Y >

Vi fXtN June 1867, my father and I, who had been studying the

S| maps and plans of a former expedition in the province
of Parané, were commissioned by the Minister of Public
Works at Rio de Janeiro to explore the Madeira River, and to project
a railroad along its bank where, by reason of the rapids, navigation
was rendered impossible.

Since the end of the last century—when, in consequence of the
treaty of Ildefonso in 1777, Portuguese astronomers and surveyors
no regular or reliable plans had been executed

ascended the Madeira
of the immense forest-covered valley. The bold descent effected some
twenty years ago by the American naval officer Gibbon, I may observe,
was too hurried, and undertaken with too slender means; and another
expedition, commanded by the Brazilian engineer, Major Coutinho,
proved to be a complete failure, though certainly not for lack of
means.*

Upon the ensuing of peace, after the long war with Paraguay,
the old question of a way of communication between the Brazilian
coast and the province of Mato Grosso came to the front; and as
that clever diplomatist, Conselheiro Felippe Lopez Netto, had also
succeeded in concluding a treaty of boundaries and commerce with
Bolivia,t by which was secured the prospect of a passage through
the valley of the Madeira, it was thought necessary that a thorough

* Another voyage of discovery undertaken by Mr. Coutinho on the Purus (an
affluent of the Solimdes) gave similar negative results. ‘That river afterwards became
better known through the daring of Mr. Chandless.

+ By this treaty.the Brazilio-Bolivian boundary is to touch the left shore of the
Madeira under 10° 20’ south latitude, near the mouth of the Beni.



vi PREFACE.

exploration should be made. General attention was, moreover, directed
to that remote corner of the vast realm by the sudden appearance
of a new Steam Navigation Company on tke Lower Madeira, and
by the recent opening of the Amazon River to the flags of all nations ;
the realisation of the full benefit of which latter measure depends on its
extension to the lateral rivers as well.

The following pages embrace, in addition to a summary of the
most important hydrographic results of the voyage, my remarks on the
inhabitants, the vegetation, the products, and other topics of interest
in connection with these countries, not in the dry form originally
assumed by them of a diary, but in the more inviting shape of
chapters, under which easier access may be had to the whole.

The illustrations, which I regard as indispensably supplementary
to the description of scenes so foreign to us, are from sketches taken
on the spot, and, for preservation of their minute fidelity, drawn on
the blocks by myself; and the name of one of our first wood engravers
will further warrant their accuracy.

Soon, however, there will be no need of well-equipped expeditions to
visit these outposts of Ultima Thule. Comfortable steamers from Liver-
pool will convey the tourist, bent on a trip, to Para in eighteen days.
In seven days more he can be at the mouth of the Madeira; and
in another week’s time he may get to the first rapid of Santo Antonio,
whence, at no very distant period, the locomotive will hurry him to
the magnificent forests, which we could reach only after a troublesome
voyage of three months’ duration, counting from the mouth of the
Madeira.

A life of bustle and activity will then be infused there. India-
rubber, cacdo, precious timber, dye-woods, and resins will no longer
perish for want of means of transport; and agriculture and cattle-
breeding will restrict, if they cannot yet supplant, the half-wild existence
supported by hunting and fishing. Even before our return home from
South America, after an absence of seventeen years, we had the satis-
faction of seeing the execution of our railway project as good as
secured ; a North American contractor, Colonel G. E. Church, thoroughly
familiar with this part of the world, having obtained the necessary
concessions in that behalf from both the Brazilian and the Bolivian
Governments, and having experienced little difficulty in raising the
requisite funds in England.


PREFACE. vii

If the following pages, in which I have endeavoured to observe
the true medium between optimist and pessimist views of things, should
help to convince some Brazilian in authority who may chance to peruse
them, of the continued existence of pernicious abuses and errors, and
should show him that, in spite of undeniable recent progress, the career
of improvement has not been exhausted; and if they should succeed in
inflaming the Old World with interest in the welfare of these secluded
corners of the New, some at least of my heartiest aspirations will have
been realised. These countries do indeed demand attention, if it be only
on the ground that they offer the fair prospect of some day becoming
outlets for those fermenting elements-which, with increased seriousness,
have lately menaced social order in over-peopled Europe.

By the emancipation of slave-born children, from the first day of
January 1872, it is true that the abolition of Slavery, which is the
chief bar to real progress, has become simply a question of time:
but we have to await the political equalisation of the immigrants with
the natives, and the concession of the right of civil marriage,* before
we can, with clear consciences, advise our farmers of the better class
to settle there. Poor labourers and small tradesfolk, however, so
numerous with us, will profit by the change to high wages, even
under existing conditions.

Only an immigration of German race, that really setéles in the
new home and honestly shares the burdens of the State, can truly
help the thinly-peopled country ; and Brazil, which sees thousands of
Portuguese landing yearly and going back as soon as they have
scraped together a few hundred milreis, is specially qualified to judge
of this radical difference between Latin and German nations. Energetic
representatives, such as we at last seem to have beyond the Atlantic,’
particularly at Rio, will meanwhile avail sufficiently to protect German
residents in Brazil, and in due time effect the removal of all the
inconveniences incident to their settlement there.

* In June, 1873, the Brazilian Government had come to an open rupture with the
Bishop of Pernambuco, or rather with Rome itself, on account of the Encyclical
against the Freemasons, who number several of the highest Brazilian officials in their
fraternity. In the interests of peace and decency in the Protestant colonies, however,
the Government was forced not only to declare the validity of unions effected after
the Protestant rite, against the decision of the Bishop, but also to prosecute at law
two colonists’ wives who had become Catholics in order to marry a second’ time,
together with the Catholic priests who had performed the second ceremony.



viii PREFACE.

In conclusion, I desire to be allowed here to express my thanks
to my father, who was my trusty companion on the weary voyage,
and my scientific associate, and to my brother, Professor Ferd. Keller,
the historic painter, whose tasteful counsel respecting the illustrations
has proved of so much value to me.

FRANZ KELLER-LEUZINGER.

CARLSRUHE,
January, 1874.

Nore to the Second English Edition.—In the present edition the foreign measurements
have been reduced to English, and the translation revised throughout, by
Mr. H. W. Bates, Assistant Secretary of the Royal Geographical Society.



CONTENTS.

—++—
PAGE
List or THE ILLUSTRATIONS, WITH sHORT EXPLANATIONS. . Pp : : F XI
InrRoDUCTION f " , . . A . . : k : F , 1
CHAPTER I.
FROM RIO DE JANEIRO TO THE RAPIDS OF THE MADEIRA.

Rio de Janeiro.—Bahia.—Pernambuco.—Parahyba do Norte.—Ceara.—Maranhio.

—Para.—The Amazon.—The Rio Negro.—Manaios.—The Lower Madeira.—
The Seringueiros.—The Praia de Tamandua . . : ; . ‘ . 29

CHAPTER II.
THE RAPIDS OF THE MADEIRA AND THE MAMORE.

Santo Antonio.—Theotonio.—The Caripunas Indians.—Caldeirao do Infecno.—The
“‘ Written Rocks.” —Salto do Girio.— An Attack.—Old Caripuna Huts.—Ribeirao.
—More ‘“ Written Rocks.’’—The Mouth of the Beni.—Exaltacion . 7 . 54

CHAPTER III.
CANOE AND CAMP LIFE.

The Start.The Kitchen.—The Bast Shirts.—The Straw Hats.—Strange Dainties.
—Alligator-hunting—The Camp fires.—The Camisetas.—The Mosquitoes.—
The Halting-place : . : c ; a - ; 4 4 : 85

CHAPTER IV.

HUNTING AND FISHING IN THE PROVINCES OF AMAZON AND MATO-GROSSO-
The Pird-ruct.—The Lamantin or Peixe-boii—The Botos.—Popular Belief regarding
them.—The Minhoeao and the Mae @’Agua.—Different Modes of Fishing: in the
Pary, with the Covo and the Timbé.—The Rays, the Piranhas, and the Can-
dirus.—Tapir-hunting.—The Jaguar, the Wild Hog, the Capivara, the Monkeys,
and the Birds : : : ; : : c 3 c 9 E 5 OB
b



x CONTENTS.

CHAPTER V.

THE VEGETATION OF THE VIRGIN FOREST ON THE AMAZON AND THE MADEIRA.

PAGE
Transformations and New Formations.—Terras Cahidas.—Orchids and Bromelie.

—Ferns.—Creepers.—Buttressed Trees.—The India-rubber, and its Prepara-
tion.—The Cacio.—Medicinal Plants—Oils.—Resins.—Fibres.—The Urary or
Curare.—The Peruvian Bark.—The Guarand.—The Coca ; 5 A . 108

CHAPTER VI.
THE WILD INDIAN TRIBES OF THE MADEIRA VALLEY.

The Muras.—The Araras.—The Mundrucis.—The Parentintins.—The Caripunas:
our First Meeting with them.—Their Huts.—Their Burial-ground.—Former
Attacks on the Madeira, Javary, and Puris.—The Unknown Footpads at the
Mouth of the Mamoré.—Future of these Indians.—Their Languages.—Their
Religious Views.—The Pajés.—An Old Indian Settlement ; : 5 . 187

CHAPTER VII.
THE MOJOS INDIANS OF THE FORMER JESUIT MISSIONS IN BOLIVIA.

Founding of a Mission.—The Life there.—Strict Discipline.—Their Decay and
Present State.—
Storms.—Festivities and Processions.—Visit of the Excellentissimo.—The
Chicha.—A Vocabulary.—The Missions on the Paranapanema and Tibagy.—
Final Considerations . ; : ’ : . 3 ‘ : ; . 170

APPENDIX.

Mode of Conducting our Surveys, and their hear and ze peeepasteica!
Results.—Statisties : c . : 5 5 d z - - 204

onset §



LIST OF THE ILLUSTRATIONS,

WITH SHORT
PREFACE.
Vienetre: Prneapenes, Cast, BANANAS, ETC.
INTRODUCTION.
Inttran.: Crown or Pa.M-TREE WITH

FLowers AND Frutrt.

CHAPTER I.
Initran: Group or Crp5s (Lianas) Ev-

CIRCLING A Lirrue Pa.

Entry or tHe Bay or Rio pe JANEIRO,

AS SEEN FROM THE CoRCOVADO.

From the top of the Corcovado, which
can easily be reached in three hours from
the centre of the city, a magnificent view
spreads before the eyes of the surprised
beholder ; a wide panorama extending over
land and sea, over rocky mountains, the
ample harbour, faint-blue islands, villas
half-hidden in vivid green, and bustling
streets. The sketch gives the entrance of
the bay, with the ‘ Sugar-loaf”’ seen from
behind.

EXPLANATIONS.

to the little town of Theresopolis, from a
height of about 2,500 feet.

Tue Entry or THE Bay or Rio pe JANEIRO.

This view is taken from the shore oppo-
site the city of Rio. In the background
the ‘‘Sugar-loaf”’ (Pao d’Assucar), whose
altitude is about 1,000 feet; in front of it,
the old fort of Santa Cruz, which com-
mands the entry; between both, the far
horizon of the blue Atlantic; amid the
mountains to the right, the pointed top of
the Corcovado, rising to 3,000 feet, imme-
diately behind the city.

A JANGADA IN THE BREAKERS.

The jangada, a light raft especially used
for fishing, is in use on the coast from
Pernambuco to Ceara; the flat beach and
the total want of good harbours, whether
natural or artificial, not allowing the land-
ing of heavier boats. In spite of the
admirable skill and dexterity of the Indians
and mestizoes, who usually manage them,
they are often submerged, and even over-

THe Ruaeep Peaks or tHE OrGan Movun-
TAINS.

The most interesting portion of the Serra
d’Estrella, which rises in the background
of the Bay of Rio de Janeiro to a height
of 7,000 feet, is the Serra dos Orgiaos,
with its peaks and needles. Like all the
mountains round about Rio, it consists of
metamorphic gneiss. The view is taken

from a steep, ill-paved mule-path, leading

turned by the high surf, and the passengers
seldom escape without a slight bath.

Tur Dirrerent Staces or Lanp Formation.

BuRIAL-URN oF THE Manaos_ Inprans

(Icagana).
These igagabas were found not only in
various parts of Brazil, but also in Bolivia,
on the other side of the Andes on the



xii ‘LIST OF THE
shores of the Pacific; these latter, by
reason of the dry climate apparently,
containing extraordinarily well-preserved
corpses.

Icarapt po Espinrro Sayro, on, Do CoRREIO,
az ManAos,

The proud fan-palms on the shores
belong to the family of the merity, or
Mauritius palm, while the dense row of
plants close to the water’s edge (the aninga)
much resembles our calla, and belongs to
the colocasie. ,

Tue Crarr on tHe AmAzon, Rio Nearo,
AND Mapeira.

A coberta, batelao, igarités, and mon-
tarias in the port of Manaos. The large
palm-leaves forming the roof of the im-
provised kitchen are of the uauasst, an
attalea. The shore shows a bank of the
pedra-canga, the ferruginous, easily-crum-

bling sandstone of the Amazon Basin.

House or a Rich S#RinGuriro.

In the middle the palm-leaf-covered
house; in the foreground, to the right,
a group of the banana da terra (pacova),
or indigenous plantain, a large bundle of
whose yellow fruit an Indian is taking
to the kitchen.

TURTLE-HUNTING ON THE MApETRA.
Tue Sararaca; THE PoIsoN USED FOR It.

Vianette : Harpoon, with Fisnine-net

AND REEDS.

CHAPTER II.
Initia: Trunk wir Orcnips, Bromerim,
AND FERNS.

Tus Turotonio Fann or tas Mapeira.
Owing to the considerable width of the
river (700 metres) the principal fall (of.
11 metres) appears less high than it really
is. However, the mighty waves, the daz-

ENGRAVINGS.

zling foam, the black boulders appearing
now and again, and the primitive wildness
of the shores, which are partly covered
with high forest and partly washed by the
floods up to the bare rocks, combine to

give it quite an imposing aspect.

ONE OF THE SMALLER Rapips oF THE

CALDEIRAO DO INFERNO.

To avoid the great break in the main
channel, the partly-unladen boats have to
pass, close to the islands near the shore,
through one of the side ones, which offers
the comparative advantage of the slope
being extended over a greater length.

FAan-LEAF OF A PaLM.

An exceedingly graceful palm, 12 to 15
metres high, with asmooth stem. We saw

it oniy in the region of the rapids.

Turn Rapp or RIBEIRAO, SEEN FROM ABOVE.

One of the most interesting points in
the whole Valley. A rocky reef, wildly
torn and broken by narrow foaming chan-
nels, stretches across the whole width of
the river, which is 2,000 metres. Its
highest points, unwashed by the floods,
are crowned by dense groves, topped with
slender palms waving to and fro in the

gale.

Carvep Figures oN THE Rocks oF THE

Maperra.

Though perplexing enigmas to us, per-
haps for ever, they will be of interest as
evidencing the degree of civilisation pos-
sessed by the ancient inhabitants of these

regions,

GROUND-PLAN OF THE FORMER Mission oF
EXXALTACION.

VienettE: Inpian Urensizs.

An elegantly shaped pot, a few cala


LIST OF THE

bashes, a dosser, a maraca (sort of rattle
used on solemn oceasions), and feather
ornaments, with maize, sugar-cane, and
the deeply-indented leaves of the mandioca
on a broad hand-rudder with gandily-
painted tiller, the most indispensable utensil
of the Indians.

CHAPTER III.

Tntrman: Empatsa (Crecropta) with Bro-

MELIZ.

HALTING-PLACE IN THE SHADE OF A ForeEst-
GIANT.

If trees of the dimensions of that repre-
sented here are not found in all tropical
forests, they are not a rare sight in the
rich alluvion of the Amazon Basin. They
generally belong to the ficus family, with
A halt in the cool
shade of such a giant, covered with hun-

light white wood.

dreds of parasitic plants, from the broad-
leaved imbé with its rope-like roots to
strange orchids and graceful ferns, when
the mid-day sun fills the atmosphere
around with its glowing rays, is quite

a treat after a morning’s hard work.

Our Pappiers at BREAKFAST.

On 2 well-chosen spot, in the shade
of slender myrtacew and high cacao-bushes,
with their golden cucumber-like fruit bud-
ding directly from the stem, our brown
fellow-travellers (in their stiff bast shirts,
or their more elegant white camisetas) are
seated round the large earthen pot, out of
which the Capitao is distributing the thick
pap of maize, or mandioca flour, mixed
with little pieces of meat. The loiterer
in the foreground is busily beating a stiff

iece of bast with the wooden “ maceta,”’
to render it soft and pliable enough for

wearing.
Tousours Prrprix!

Though it is rather the sea turtle that

ENGRAVINGS. xiii

gives the material to the celebrated turtle
soup, the river turtle also is used for
culinary purposes; and none of the
steamers running between Para and
Liverpool leave the mouth of the Amazon
without a few of the cuirassed amphibian.
Neither soup nor ragout of the tartaruga
is to be despised; but those who have
partaken of the same dish daily for months
and months will understand and pardon

the above exclamation.

PREPARATIONS FOR ALLIGATOR-HUNTING.

As the lazy saurian, which usually is
very shy near the shore, is always more
inclined to run and dive than to attack,
the hunt is not half so dangerous as it
looks; and as soon as the laco is over its

head it is over.

Kintinc AN ALLIGATOR.

In spite of its resistance, the mighty
animal is dragged on to a sand-bank and
finished with a few strokes of an axe.
Its timidity notwithstanding, however,
Indian women while washing on shore
have been carried off, as I was told by
eye-witnésses, though immediate help was

at hand.

Vienettn: Fientina Macaws.

CHAPTER IV.
InrrzaL: Impfi (PHILODENDRON).

The long straight air-roots, demitted by
the pothos and aroidex from their lofty
seats in the crowns of gigantic trees down
to the ground, are one of the most striking
features of primeval vegetation.

SupmercEep Forest.

In December, January, and February
a great part of the wooded lowlands is
more or less inundated by the annual
floods. On these smooth, lake-like sheets



XIV LIST OF THE ENGRAVINGS.

of water, whose dark surface vividly re-
flects the luxuriant vegetation, the native
hunter harpoons the mighty pira-rucu.

Tue Piri-ruct (Suprs cieas).

This giant of the rivers is signalised as
much by its size (3 metres length) as by
the brightness of its colour, each of the
big silvery scales being edged by a scarlet
line, whence its name,—pira, jish; and
ruci, or uruct, red; especially the red
dyeing-stuff of the Bixa Orellana.

Tue Lamanrix, on Perxe-nor (Manatus
AMERICANUS).

This representative of the cetaceans
sometimes reaches the length of 4 metres,
and is found on the whole course of the
Amazcn, up to Peri: but its principal
abode is not in the main river, but in
the lake-like old courses beside it, which
usually are densely covered with wild rice
and a sort of long grass with blister-like
knots, that serve to keep it afloat.

Fisnine with THE Covo.

The Mojos Indians of the Missions wait,
at the edges of shoals or banks, for the
periodic ascent (at spawning-time, and in
dense swarms) of the fish up the rivers
and rivulets ; when, by dexterous throwing
of the covo (a sort of basket of heavy
palm-wood, open below and at the top)
they try to enclose a certain proportion
of them, which they can readily take out
at the opening above.

Mosos INDIAN RETURNING FROM A FisHING
Excursion.

These rivers, with their ichthyologic
treasures (which can, besides, be acquired
in the shortest time at the right season)
would at low water level, and at the right
spots, below some fall or rapid, indeed

make an angler’s paradise. The largest of
the victims that fell to our Mojos is the
spotted surubim or pintado, a species of
siluris ; the one behind it is the tambaki ;
while at the other end of the bamboo a
brown and yellow-spotted ray drags its
armed tail over the rocks, and a peixe-
cachorro shows its needle-like teeth on the
fisher’s left hand. The orchid with the
long leaves climbing up the mimosa, to
the left, is the vanilla.

Heap or Swivmine Tapir, PURSUED BY

Does.

The poor, hard-pursued pachyderm had
reached the opposite shore, thanks to its
quickness in swimming and diving, and in
another moment would have escaped the
furious curs, if a ball from the hunters,
waiting in the canoe behind over-hanging
boughs, had not reached it. The uplifted
short trunk discloses teeth of respectable
size ; but, on the whole, the clumsy animal
is a harmless, good-natured creature, and
little danger is incurred in hunting it.

CanipuNA INDIANS, WITH KILLED Tapir.

Under a dense screen of parasite
creepers, blooming orchids, graceful ferns,
and stiff bromeliw, the tapir, pierced by
several arrows, has broken down. The
lucky hunter, a dark Caripuna, will cut it
up, selecting the best pieces for himself;
and his faithful companion will carry home
the heavy load in her platter of palm-
leaves. Her lord and master only carries
the weapons, and of these just what he
requires to be ready for shooting—a bow
and two arrows. The remaining supply
of them the humble wife has also to carry.

VIGNETTE: DEAD Parrot, Toucan, AND
Water-FowL; AN InpiAN Herap-prEss ;
Bows anp Arrows.


LIST OF THE ENGRAVINGS. xv

CHAPTER Y.

Initia: COFFEE-PLANT COVERED WITH

Berriks.

The coffee-shrub, cultivated in immense
plantations on the undulating soil of the
Provinces of Rio de Janeiro, Sao Paulo,
Minas Geraes, and Espirito Santo, begins
to bear in the fourth year, and sometimes
is so heavily laden with the red, cherry-
like berries that the slender boughs bend
to the earth.
resembling that of the myrtle, exhales a

The snow-white flower,

most delicate perfume ; and in bloom as
well as at harvest-time the bushy shrub,
with its glossy, dark leaves, offers a grati-

fying sight.

TRANSVERSE SECTION OF A BREAKING SHORE,

CALLED TERRAS CAHIDAS.

Owing to the homogeneousness of the
alluvial layers, the water-washed shore
often breaks down, with such regularity as
to form perfect degrees, linked at the
surface by a sort of network or bridge
formed by the tough roots.

Broken SHORE ON THE MaDEIRA, WITH A
Group oF SINKING JAVARY-PALMS.

The landscape represented by this
sketch, taken at sunset, is quite charac-
teristic of the whole Madeira, in its wild
loneliness and majestic calm.

ButtresseD TREE.

In order to gain the necessary stability,
the gigantic trunk, which has no deep
roots, shoots out these huge wing-like
buttresses. It is found in the North as
well as in the South.

GroresguE Suave or A Species or Ficus.

Forms like these, drawn exactly after
Nature, are not a rare sight in these
forests, though they are not often seen of

that size. The trunk almost suggests a
living being by the way it clasps the
naked boulders and shoots out supports
and props wherever they are needed.

Usuat Structure oF Patm Roots; S1im1s
oF THE PaxriBa.

The radical fibres, entangled to a thick
clod with most palms, are developed into
perfect stilts with the paxiuba (Iviartea

exorhiza).

Our Trenr uNDER Pabms.

Though we were not lucky enough often
to find such a Paradisaic little spot, still it
occasionally fell to our lot, and we always
thoroughly enjoyed it.

DIFFERENT TRANSVERSE Cuts OF PALM-RIBS.
BirurcaTteED PaLM-LEAF.

Boven or THe SrpyonrA Exassica (Caout-
CHOUC-TREE).

Very different from the so-called ficus,
or gum-tree, often seen in European hot-
houses, which also gives a resin, but not
the one demanded by commerce.

Movurs or a Lateran RiveR ON THE
Mapgrrra, WITH AN INDIAN SHOOTING
FisHes.

The mighty tres rising above its neigh-
bours is the castanheira (Bertholletia ea-
celsa) ; in the foreground, the round
dish-like leaves of the Victoria regia.

A Serineverro’s First SETTLEMENT ON
THE MADEIRA.

On the high shore, but in the immediate
vicinity of the moist seringaes (caoutchouc-
tree woods), the first household arrange-
ments are made. ‘The richly-embroidered
hammock is extended between two trees,
and a dense musquiteiro is spread over



xvi LIST OF TH

another, serving for the night, and shaded
with a light roof.
right is the kitchen, with a tartaruga
(turtle), that most patient of all slaughtered
animals, which, simply laid on its back,

Immediately to the

helplessly and noiselessly awaits the fatal
stroke. In the foreground, the temporary
wife of the owner, a young mestizo lady
with raven-black hair, comfortably smokes
her cigar, rocking herself leisurely in the
hammock.

PREPARATION OF THE INDIA-RUBBER.

The workman, a Mojos Indian, holding
his wooden shovel, covered with a fresh
layer of milk, in the white smoke which
issues out of the chimney-like pots from
a fire of uauassi and urucury palm-nuts
(which alone consolidates the milk in the
proper way), sits in the midst of his
simple utensils; the nuts on the ground,
the calabashes, and a goblet of bamboo
in which he fetched the milk from the
seringal, to pour it into the turtle-shell in
the middle.

VIGNETTE: SUSPENDED Brrps’ Nests.

These nests, of elastic fibres solidly
interwoven, are made by the guache
(belonging to the cassicus species), a
black bird of the size of our starling, with
a long yellow tail. Sometimes several
dozens of them are seen suspended at the
overhanging boughs on the riverside, or at
the extreme end of the branches of tall
palms. Whoever has seen a palm-crown
waved to and fro and shaken by the wind
will form an idea of the comforts of such
a lofty seat. One, verily, must be a
guache to find the door of the swinging
house.

CHAPTER VI.

Initiau: FErn-rrer with BroMELIZ AND
Orcuips.

The graceful fern-trees are, with the

ENGRAVINGS.

palms and musaceex, one of the most
striking forms of tropical vegetation. In
Brazil there are at least six very different
species of this family. The orchid in the
foreground is the sumaré (Cyrtopodiwn
glutiniferum, Raddi), whose sticky sap is
used by the mestizoes of the interior for
birdlime, and the repairing of their man-
dolines, and for other purposes.

Barx-Caxoz or Arara Inpians.

There can be no lighter, simpler, and
better-constructed crafts in the world than
these bark-canoes of the Araras and Cari-
punas. Elastic pieces of bark of a finger’s
thickness, stiffened out in the middle and
lightly laced at the ends, they accommo-
date four persons very well; and two will
easily carry one over the rocks of some

rapid down to calmer water.

Our First Mrenrinc wira THE Carrpuna
Inprans.

The vegetation in the original sketch
was drawn from Nature. Our first sight
of our savage friends upon our landing
I have tried to reproduce from memory
as faithfully as possible.

Porrrarr or a yvoune Carreuna INDIAN.

The physiognomy of the young warrior
with the long hair and the bunch of red
toucan feathers in the nose, may be taken
as the type of the whole horde.

Carrpuna INDIAN HUNTING.

Half hidden in the dark shade of thorny
prejatba palms, his long black ‘hair hang-
ing like a mane over his back, he waits,
ready to shoot his game, be it the graceful
deer, the wild hog, or the tapir. The
straight ropes on the right are the air-
roots of the imbé; aroidex clinging high
above in the lofty crown of a castanheira.


LIST OF THE ENGRAVINGS. xvii

VicnerrE: HvuMMING-BIRD DEFENDING ITS
Nest AGAINST SNAKE.

CHAPTER VII.

Initia: THE Mammao (Carrca Papaya)
AND SUGAR-CANE.

The mamm4o, or papaw-tree, is often
found in the coffee or sugar-plantations ;
its fruit, of the size of a child’s head, is
eaten, though rather insipid.

Tur Mystery oF THE TRINITY EXPLAINED
BY A JEsuir ARTIST.

This representation, painted al fresco on
the tympanum of the old church at
Trinidad ‘‘in usum Indianorum,” is,
in spite of its rudeness of conception and
execution, admirably adapted to the
childish minds of the red-skinned neo-

phytes.

Mosos Inpran oF THE FORMER Mission oF
TRINIDAD.

The dark-brown, strongly-set sword-
dancer in the classical garment and the
bright feather-crown, dancing (like King
David) in honour of the Lord, is rarely to
be seen even now: but when we put
together all the other emblems of cere-
monial pomp and sacerdotal sway—the
gold-embroidered banners, the heavy silver
crosses and swinging censers, the rich
garlands of flowers, and the palm-
branches—with the dark blue sky canopy-
ing the whole, it must be owned that the
High Festivals of the Missions could vie
in splendour with any Saint’s-day in
Kurope.

THe rormer Mission or HExauTaction DE
La Santa Cruz.

One might almost fancy the severe
spirit of Loyola’s disciples still hovering
about the quiet Plaza and under the
decaying verandas with their carved pillar-

capitals, which will never be restored
when they finally yield to the corrosion
of wind and weather. Women in their
long tipoyas glide noiselessly by, with
their primitive ewers on their heads, and
the men pass you with a curt greeting.
The convyent-like stillness has not yet quite
subdued the children, who prattle and
play and ask unanswerable questions, as
they are wont to do everywhere.

Hien Mass atv T'rmrap.

Here are represented genuine red-skins
executing—partly on well-known, partly
strangely-shaped instruments of their own
manufacturing—the masterpieces of old
Italian sacred music. With an industry
one would hardly give their race credit
for, they have kept up the art from gene-
ration to generation, in spite of the pro-
longed misgovernment of the white mas-
ters of the land, which would have crushed
the art proclivities of a less tough nation.
Who after this will deny to them the
capacity of further development ?

Mosos Inpran From TRINIDAD.

The noble features of this Indian, be-
longing to one of our boats’ crews,
reminded me always of Seume’s

“Hin Canadier, der noch Europier,’’ etc. ;

and, if he did not quite answer to that
ideal of a red-skin, he was at least one of
the most taciturn of the taciturn Indians.

Martano: Mosos rrom TRINIDAD.

A handy, clever fellow, who, under the
instruction of our cook, tried hard to
enlarge his culinary knowledge, and to
catch now and then an extra good morsel.
His broad cheekbones, oblique eyes, scanty
beard, and disposition to embonpoint, gave
him the appearance of a Chinese mandarin,
deepened somewhat in colour.



XViii LIST OF THE ENGRAVINGS.

Carrrio Pay: Cuierrain or tHe CayowA

INDIANS.

The old chief, who, together with his
tribe, more than forty years ago left the
forests on the Ivinheima and Iguatemy,
to play more or less the part of a media-
tised prince in the Aldeamento de San
Ignacio on the Paranapanema, is to the
present day a prototype of the good-
natured sly Guarani. The preponderance
of the well-armed settlers, always ready
for deeds of violence and drawing
nearer and nearer his native woods,
and perhaps vague reminiscences and
tales of the paternal government of the
Jesuits, will have brought him to the
conviction that it is better to live under
the protection of the Pae-guassi (that is
the Emperor) than to be annihilated in a
hopeless resistance.

CHIEF OF THE

Caritio VrE1 Bane:

Coroapos.
A striking contrast to the last is the
chief of the Coroados, living in another

Aldeamento, that of S. Jeronimo. Only
after hard fighting, and when he saw that
there really was no help for it, did he
submit to the white man; and even now
his fidelity is not always to be relied on.
The following is a characteristic illustration
of his supercilious pride. I once showed
him my revolver, and explained that in a
short time I could fire six shots with it.
Well knowing the style of the braggart,
who had some time before assured me,
pointing to a round mark on his forehead,
that the ball which had caused it had
come out at the back of his head, I fully
expected he would not exhibit any sign of
surprise: but I was almost taken aback
when, bestowing a contemptuous sidelook
at the weapon, and repeatedly mimicking
my “‘piff! paff!” he gave me to under-
stand that he could far more rapidly
dispatch a greater number of whizzing,

never-erring arrows !

VienertE : Means OF CIVILISING THE
Inprans USED BY THE ComPaANy OF

JESUS.



INTRODUCTION.

SEN Brazil, a country most
5) richly Andere by Nature,
“8 and which has, of late, re-
peatedly attracted the attention
of Europe by its long war with
Paraguay, and its endeavours to
solve the Slave Question, we find
all the conditions and modes of
life so vastly different from what
we are used to ourselves, that the
following remarks, intended to
give the reader a general idea of the country, will not, perhaps, be out
of place.

This immense Empire (it is nearly as large as Europe) is divided into
twenty Provinces, differing greatly from each other in size and import-
ance. In respect to trade, its situation is a highly favoured one; the
Atlantic, with many excellent harbours, forming its eastern Sonne for
34 degrees of latitude, and the two powerful nets of the Amazon and La
Plata, not yet estimated at their true value, linking the sea-coast with
the rich countries of the interior.

Its extent, not easily determinable, by reason of the many undecided
contests about boundaries, and of the inexactitude of the maps, was
estimated by Humboldt to be 3,072,170 English square miles. The
following list shows its division into Provinces; but I must add that the

B



2 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

statement is given with all reserve, being the result of approximate
calculations, the boundaries between the provinces themselves not being
clear for the most part.

Amazonas . - , ; , , 576,160 English sq. miles.
Para . : . . ; ° 3 478,360 a
Maranhao . . . : ; , 191,340 a
Piauhy . . . ; , ‘ < 91,420 as
Cearé .. . . : : : 3 46,770 a
Rio Grande do Norte : . ; : 27,850 3
Parahyba : . ; : . : 20,200 5
Pernambuco . , . : : : 39,970 ad
Alagoas-. ; . : ‘ | : 15,730 -
Sergipe . : , ‘ ‘ ; . 16,580 _
Bahia. : ; : : 2 . 308,280 -
Espirito Santo : : ‘ : . 23,380 =
tio de Janeiro . . ‘ : . 28,700 Y
Sao Paulo . ; : . ; F 83,550 3
Parané . : . . ; 4 ; 71,750 on
Santa Catharina. : ’ : - 31,890 33
Rio Grande do Sul . : ; . : 98,430 -
Minas Geraes . ‘ . : , 4 239,180 ne
Goyaz  . 5: ; ; : : . 297,650 5)
Mato Grosso. ; ; . ; ; 595,300 om

The climate of Brazil is almost throughout a warm and moist one.
There are none of those contrasts caused by high ice-and-snow-covered
P Cordilleras, as in Peru and Bolivia; on whose slopes you pass in rapid
succession the burning heat of Africa, the pleasant freshness of Northern
Italy, and the chilling cold of Siberia. The provinces of Rio Grande do
Sul, Santa Catharina, Parana, and a part of Sao Paulo, enjoy a fine
temperate climate, much like that of Southern Europe; but, on the
whole, the thoroughly tropical character of the gigantic riverine plains
of the Amazon, Parand, Paraguay, and Sao Francisco prevails.
In Rio de Janciro the average temperature of the year, as shown by
a six-years’ record at the Observatory, is between 73° and 75° Fahrenheit
(18° and 19° R.). During summer, that is, during the three winter
months of Enrope, December, January, and February, it is between 79°
and 81° F, (21° and 22° R.); and in July, the coldest month, about 70°
C. (17° R.).* In the last twenty or thirty years, the climate of Rio de
Janeiro has sensibly changed, doubtless in consequence of the destruction
of the forests round about the city. or instance, in the cold season, the

* Two and a half or three and a half degrees more must be counted for the city,
as the Observatory is situated on the Morro do Castello, several hundred feet above it,
where it is swept by the cool sea-breeze.



INTRODUCTION. 3

temperature does not now sink to its former low level ; and, instead of a
decided dry and rainy season, the rains now fall more equally throughout
the year ; while the ay erage number of storms during the year is twenty-
six, whereas, formerly, they could daily be counted upon with the
greatest certainty during the three hot months, as is the case still at
Para.

It is a remarkable fact that, immediately after that period (1850),
epidemics, like yellow fever and cholera, unknown before in Rio, made
their grim entry, and have demanded their yearly victims ever since.
We are unable to determine whether there is any vital connection
between the two facts, or whether the ironical post hoe ergo propter
hoe ! is applicable thereto.

Along the whole coast north of Rio, the climate is much like that
of the capital, moist and warm, though in many places the sea-breeze
injures the wheat. At Bahia the average temperature, in summer,
is said. to be 82° F.; that in winter, 714° F. At Para the average
temperature amounts to 79° F., and that on the plains of the Amazon
to 82°—84° F., with a minimum of 75° F. in the cooler months.

In the interior, the different seasons show a greater variety. In
the southern parts of Minas Geraes, at heights of from 1,500 to 2,000
feet above the sea-level, the average yearly temperature is 66°—
68° F.; that of summer, 75°—77° F.; that of winter, 59° F.; but fre-
quently the thermometer sinks to freezing point; and it is not a rare
sight to see tropical plants, such as coffee, plantain, and sugar cane,
severely damaged by the night frosts. In S40 Paulo the average annual
temperature varies between 714° and 734° F.; in Rio Grande do Sul,
that of summer, between 77° and 804° F., while in winter it is some-
times below freezing-point. In the German colony of Sao Leopoldo
the mercury once even showed 50° F. In Donna F rancisca, another
German colony of the province of Santa Catharina, the average annual
temperature is 68°—70° F.; that of the summer months (December,
January and February), 75°—77° F. However, 97°—983° F. in
summer and 34° in winter are not thought extraordinary.

Generally, there are but two distinct seasons in Brazil, the cool
or dry one, and the hot or rainy one, whose beginning and duration
depend greatly upon the local configuration of the country. The
latter usually begins in October or November; at some distance from
the seaboard, a little later; and in some parts of Maranhio, Piauhy,



4 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

and Ceara it sometimes fails to make its appearance at all, to the
great misery of the population. Then the country looks like a desert;
the trees lose their leaves; the grass on the Campos seems to be
burnt up, and the mortality is greatly increased, until the first shower
brings back health and life to everything and every one. In most of
the other parts, almost all the trees and shrubs preserve their foliage
during the dry season, though they all suffer more or less, and would
do so more if they were not refreshed every night by a profuse dew.

In the southern provinces, where the climate assumes more and
more the character of the temperate zone, the rains set in in winter;
that is, in June, July, and August; and the hot season is identical
with the dry one; while, on the border of the two zones—in some

parts of the province of Parana, for example—two rainy seasons may
be distinguished; the first in January and February, and the second
in September.

In Rio de Janeiro and its environs, the annual rain-fall amounts
to 50 inches; but at the mouth of the Amazon, with its endless virgin
forests, its immense water-sheets, and the rapid evaporation under a
glowing sun, it amounts to no less than 200 inches, being more than
six times the average quantity in Europe.

On the whole, the climate may be called a healthy one, with the
exception of a few riverine plains, such as the Rio Doce, Mucury, and
some of the affluents of the Amazon, which are plagued with inter-
mittent fevers. The yellow fever, which first caused great havoc at
Rio de Janeiro, in 1850, reappears there almost every year since then,
and has even increased in intensity of late; but Brazilians and acclima-
tized Europeans will easily escape it by a sober, regular mode of life.
New arrivals, it is true, incur great danger; and I should advise every
one who has not lived for years under the tropics, to show his back,
in yellow-fever time, to the cities on the seaboard, and to live in the
interior until the terrible visitor is gone. Even now, at the German
colony of Petropolis, distant only some eight leagues from Rio, but
2,500 feet above the sea-level, one is perfectly safe from it, as it
always keeps near the coast, within a narrow range. But not so
the cholera. Although here, as everywhere, it pursues especially the
highways of commerce, and has its favourite haunts in populous
towns, yet there is not one place (be it ever so much out of the way)
in all South America, since its first visit in 1852, where one can


INTRODUCTION. 5

feel secure from this terrible Asiatic scourge. Particularly the negroes,
who do not easily fall victims to yellow fever, are cut off in great
numbers by cholera.

It is a singular fact that measles and scarlatina are almost always
of fatal issue to Indians, and devastate whole populations, while they are
not more dangerous to white people and negroes than they usually
are in Europe. ‘Together with the small-pox, they form a hideous
triumvirate, that will have not a little increased the awe and hatred
felt by the poor red-skins for the white men who introduced these
dreadful visitors to them.

Three so widely differing races as the white, the black, and the
red are, cannot but. form a very motley population. For these three
centuries, the white immigrants have driven the Indians—the first
owners of the soil

farther and farther back into the interior; and
the last red man of unmixed blood will be cut off by civilisation and
its gifts, contagious diseases and fire-water, before three ages more
are gone. Every attempt, on a large scale, to use them as slaves
ended in terrible slaughter, and the destruction of whole tribes; and
so the humane device was hit on of fetching over the woolly-headed
son of Africa, whose neck bows more easily to the yoke, and who
endures hard labour under the tropical sun so much better than either
whites or Indians. That it was not a successful hit, any reasonable
srazilian will own now, when the getting rid of the hateful institution
costs them so much trouble.

As a general census has never yet been effected (and, indeed, it would
not be an easy task in the thinly populated provinces), it is very difficult
to state, even approximatively, the number of souls. The official census
of 1867 calculated it to be 11,000,000 (1,400,000 slaves and 500,000
independent Indians included) ;* ina this statement is evidently over-
rated, as is clearly shown by the latest valuation, in August, 1872; by
which the total number of the inhabitants of Brazil is set down as

* The above-mentioned number of free Indians, spread over an area of 1,700,850
square miles of virgin forest and prairies, gives an average number of one Indian to
34 square miles. In the separate provinces, the virgin forest and prairies, or campos
ala the Indian population on them, average as follows :—~

Para, Amazonas, and Maranhio : : , ‘ . 1,275,640 sq. miles.
Mato Grosso, Goyaz, and Sao Paulo ; . : 297,650 >
Parana, Santa C atharina, and Rio Grande do Sul ’ F 106,300

?

Piauhy, Cearé, Pernambuco, Minas Geraes, and Espirito Santo 63,780 )



6 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

10,094,978, including 1,683,864 slaves and 250,000 foreigners. It is
true that neither this nor the first statement can be implicitly relied
upon, the number of slaves and of Indians, perhaps, excepted, which may
come nearer the truth.

The white race (in the strict sense of the word), although the ruling
one, forms only a minor part of the population. Especially in the
interior, only a limited number of families can boast of pure descent
‘from the first immigrants, the Portuguese—who even now come over
every year by thousands, and have got hold of almost all the retail trade
in the land. At the first glance the Brazilian is distinguished from his
ancestor. He usually is darker, small and elegantly shaped, while the
Portuguese has a much robuster frame, and is heavier and slower in
every way. By-the-bye, there is no love lost between the two; and
many a characteristic nickname tells of the mutual hatred and contempt
of the former oppressor and the oppressed. The inhabitants of the
Southern provinces, Minas, Sao Paulo, and Rio Grande, are (on the
whole) much taller and stronger, approaching more the European type,
and show more energy and activity than those of the North, where the
Indian element manifests itself more clearly.

In respect to colour, the prejudice here is by no means so strong as
in North America. Jn Brazil nobody would think of turning a man ont
from a public place, an omnibus, or the like, only because he was a
mulatto (Indian mestizoes are regarded with still more indulgence): and
there are coloured men holding high offices in the Army and in the
Administration. However, every one wishes to pass off for white; and
it is the greatest possible offence to doubt the pure lineage of a Brazilian
of good family.

The many shades of colour, some of them distinguishable only by an
experienced eye, have as many different names. Some of these are only
local expressions, and many imply contempt; so, if you wish to he
polite, say pardo (coloured man) instead of mulatto or cabra, the latter
meaning the offspring of negroes and mulattoes. The descendant of
negroes and Indians is called cartboca, cafuzo, or tupanhuna ; and the
offspring of whites and Indians mameluco, very likely intended originally
asanickname. The word erioulo (creole), used generally in Europe for
those born of European parents in Transatlantic colonies, is applied in
Brazil only to negroes born there, be they slaves or not, to distinguish them
from the Neyros da Costa, the blacks brought over from the coast of Africa.


ti

i=

INTRODUCTION. 7

There is no doubt but that the slave population of Brazil is gradually
decreasing, in spite of the official census that says the contrary; the
number of births being greatly below the number of deaths, and the
country not having received any fresh supplies from Africa these twenty
years. By the convention with England the slave trade ought to have
ceased ever since 1826; but the great gains were too tempting an
inducement. Any one who succeeded in safely landing his freight of
“ebony” on any point of the Brazilian shore became at once a wealthy
man; so, notwithstanding the English cruisers that out of a hundred
slave-vessels could hardly capture more than three, on account of the
great extent of the Brazilian and African coasts, about 28,000 slaves (at
a moderate estimate) were annually brought over. Only during the
reign of Don Pedro I. was the supply stopped, owing chiefly to the
urgency of England, by searching on the plantations in the interior for
negros novos (new negroes), and by imposing heavy fines on the culprits,
both sellers and buyers. The consequence was that the price of the
“black-ware ” rose six and sevenfold, from 300 to 2,000 milreis.

From this moment, and still more after the slave-emancipation in the
United States, every clear-sighted Brazilian must have felt that the
time was come for rooting out from his own country that hateful relic
of barbarous ages, and measures were taken accordingly. By the new
law all children born to slaves (the condition of the mother always
determining that of the children), after the first of January, 1872, are to
be free on attaining their twentieth year. Until then they are to serve
their owners as compensation for the care taken of them in their infancy.
This measure, though not destroying the evil at one blow, but keeping
it up for a number of years, must yet gain the approval of every one
who has spent any time in a slave-trading country, and has seen the
difficulties of the position. A sudden emancipation of the slaves, if it
could be effected at all without entirely ruining the present owners,
would certainly be attended with the saddest consequences, not only
to the productions of the country in general, but also to the liberated
slaves themselves.

If it be a difficult task to educate the rising generation to the degree
of obtaining their labour without absolute compulsion, it is an impos-
sible one as to the grown-up slave. Lesides this, the evil consequences
of the abominable institution will be felt for long years after its entire
abolition, in the lax morality of the families, in the total want of



8 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

intelligent workmen, and the utter impossibility, with existing means,
of improving agriculture, which hitherto has been carried on in the
rudest and most unprofitable way.

“Of what use is it,” said an intelligent, educated landowner once
to me, “of what use is it to know that we have not improved our
farming one hair’s breadth since the time of our ancestors, the Portu-
guese ? Even if we knew better what to do, and how to get out of
that wretched old routine of ours, it would not help us on; for with
the hands we employ—a crowd of stupid niggers, who, as slaves, are
stubborn, and must bear a grudge towards even the very best of
masters—it is quite impossible to effect the slightest change in our
ruinous system.”

To the coffee and sugar-growing provinces it is, of course, an all-
important matter to have new hands in the land as soon as possible, in
order to check the dreaded reduction of value in the trade and finances
of the empire.

The attempt to settle Chinese coolies proved as unsuccessful as that
to induce the planters of the Southern States, after the war, to trans-
migrate to Brazil. People had the highest idea of the wonders
American energy and industry could work there, and they believed
the long-looked-for panacea against their own indolence had been found ;
but they forgot that, in spite of all the hatred towards their victorious
neighbours, the Southerners could not but foresee the advantages held
out to them by their old home, in which, peace being restored,
agriculture, trade, and industry flourished anew, and where, after all,
they could prosper so much easier than in Brazil, where everything
was quite new to them, except slavery, and where the general indolence
would also have been a check to their activity. With the aid of some
American agents, who volunteered for the obviously lucrative job despite
their high military titles—most of them called themselves generals—
several hundreds of emigrants arrived. Besides most respectable
families, there seemed to be some perfectly organized gangs of thieves
amongst them, whose luggage was found, at the Alfandega of Rio,
to consist of false keys, rope-ladders, revolvers, and other tools of
refined modern burglary. The voyage and the first instalment of the
new-comers haying cost Brazil some hundred thousands of dollars,
almost all—including these gentlemen, I hope—returned disappointed,
after a very short sojourn; most of them, too, at the cost of the

.


OM

1 Or
tu:

)

INTRODUCTION. 9

Empire, which gained nothing by the whole affair but the tardy
discovery that a thriving country like the United States, that has not
yet reached its climax of development, and is itself in want of hands,
cannot by any means afford to send a considerable number of emigrants
even to Paradise.

If the Brazilians had cherished any hopes of reviving the decaying
institution of slavery by the settlement of the former slave-owners
from the South of the Union, their mistake certainly was a double
one; for such a success, if at all possible, would have been but a new
disaster. But if the Government would profit by the bitter lesson
for which it paid so dear, and would but try to improve the condition
of the German emigrants—the only ones that will settle for good in
their new homes, differing much in this respect from the Portuguese,
who all go back as soon as they have gained a few hundred milreis—
the result would yet prove to the advantage of the Brazilians. Unfortu-
nately they are haunted by the notion of the national existence being
endangered by too great a preponderance of foreigners, and the proper
measures for inducing settlers to come have been withheld. Instead
of giving good tracts of land gratuitously to new-comers, making roads
for them, and granting to them perfect religious freedom and political
equality with the natives, the country was discredited, in the eyes of
Europe, by rich coffee-growers being allowed to conclude those parceria
contracts with German colonists, by which the latter were placed
entirely in the hands of, sometimes, most unscrupulous masters. They
have allotted to them a certain number of coffee-plants, to which they
have to attend, and the produce of which they are to divide in equal
shares with the owners of the ground; only, as they have, with their
share, to discharge the debts contracted for the voyage (the first
instalment of payment), and for victuals during the first year, they
are kept in a state of dependence, which it is the interest of their masters
to prolong as much as they can.

Another drawback to successful colonization is that, everywhere, the
lands best adapted for agriculture and trade are scarcely to be bought for
any money ; and, consequently, colonists get land either poor in itself or
too remote from ordinary means of communication. Especially the rich
first growth (Mato-Virgem), used exclusively until now for coffee culture,
is getting dearer from day to day, and has already become scarce in
several provinces, that of Rio de Janeiro, for example, although coffce-



10 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

culture there dates back only fifty years; for, as the plant (at least with
the there usual treatment or ill-treatment) will yield only for some
twenty-five or thirty years, whoever can afford it simply leaves the old
plantations to cut down new tracks of virgin forest, instead of trying
to prolong the period of productiveness* by properly manuring the
soil.

Of course, with any activity on the part of the hundreds of thousands
of hands busy at this system of robbery, immense districts must be
cleared in a comparatively short time, and rendered unfit for coffee-
growing, at least. But, even-if this were not the case, if the virgin
forests of the interior were really inexhaustible and easicr of access than
they are, it must be of the greatest interest to the planters themselves, as
well as to the Government, and to road and railway companies, to keep
once-tilled land under cultivation, and not to put the centre of coffee-
culture farther and farther from the sea, thus rendering comparatively
useless greater and greater stretches of expensive roads.

All this considered, it must be clear that poor, newly-arrived colonists
cannot buy any soil fit for the lucrative culture of coffee near the coast ;
and, in out-of-the-way places in the interior, where it may be had on
reasonable terms, it is of no use to them, as they cannot sell the produce.
Only after the entire abolition of slavery will and can all this change.
The soil will get cheaper, especially if a land-tax be levied; the Govern-
ment will be able to buy good and advantageously situated districts for
new settlers; and then only, the large fazendas with their hundreds of
negroes disappearing, and smaller estates, conducted on sounder prin-
ciples, taking their place, agriculture will develope itself, as it ought, on
such a first-rate soil and under such a fertilising climate.

As to the Indians, considered from an ethno-economical point of view,
as working material and equivalent for the slaves, the great task of
getting them used to fixed settlements and regular work, and of uniting
them to some useful community, has already been achieved. The Jesuits
have shown by their Missions that it can be done. Lopez also, the
ill-famed President of Paraguay, who had reaped the benefits of their
long activity, working upon the same principles of absolute despotism,

* If any cheap mineral manure could be discovered which would answer this
purpose, or would render to the capoeira (second growth, from cda poeira, low or thin
forest) those elements which it lacks, compared with first growth, the fazendciros
might yet hold up their heads for many years to come.


Las

m1,
Silty

INTRODUCTION. itl

had brought his Guarani State to such a degree of national development
that he could carry on for five years a bloody war against a country of
six times the population of his little republic ; but whoever knows the
indolent character of the Indians, and the tenacity with which they
cling to their old habits, will not wonder that in Brazil little or nothing
has been attained by the small energy and scanty means allotted to
‘““eatechese dos Indios.”

The civilising work of the Jesuits was violently interrupted by their
expulsion in 1759; and the Portuguese Government, always behind a
century or two, could not devise any better plan than the pursuit of the
red-skins by fair means or foul. As late as 1808 a decree of the king
ordered war against them, especially the Botocudos, with fire and sword,

until they “ movidos do justo terror das minhas reaes armas,” should sue

for peace. Since the reign of the present emperor, Don Pedro IT., they
are protected by law, and spared at least as much as possible; still this
protection is not always efficient, by reason of the enormous extent of
the country; and the full-blood Indians will disappear in Brazil as surely
as they doin North America.

Wherever they come into immediate contact with that set of con-

scienceless intruders who usually are the “

pioneers of civilisation,” they
must succumb if there is no protecting element to help them. If a

nation is bereft at once of everything which, till then, it cherished—its

gods, its chiefs, and all its peculiar ways of life—and if it is brought
into contact with Huropean corruption ; in the state of moral destitution
consequent on the loss of all national and religious support, the worst
results are unavoidable. The zeal with which the Indians of former
Missions in Bolivia cling to the present day to the rites of the Catholic
Church, may partly have its source in their childish taste for outward
pomp and gaudy shows ; but certainly a good deal of it arises from their
striving to gain some equivalent for their lost nationality.

The gradual disappearing of this ill-fated race, numerous tribes of
which certainly bore in them germs of civilisation that might have been
developed under proper management, is the more to be regretted as the
solution of many ethnographic problems will thus become more and more
difficult. After all the most valuable notes gathered and published by
TIumboldt, Spix, Martius, D’Orbigny, Moke, and others, many facts
have not yet found satisfactory explanation, and probably never will find
Tipe

; the more so as there are so few monumental remains of former



12 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

periods, and scarcely anything written by the hands of the autochthons,
a few unintelligible hieroglyphs excepted.

On the South American Continent we find Indian tribes living close
together—not separated by any barriers, such as ice-covered heights,

impenctrable jungles, or dreary deserts—which differ so materially from
each other in language, character, and customs, that they have scarcely
anything in common but their brown skin and black lank hair. A new-
comer, deceived by this outward similarity, will think them of the same
kin and kind; but, on closer observation, he will find that they are
totally different nations, living generally in deadly feud with each other ;
and by-and-bye he will also discover their physiognomies to be of quite
another type.* So in the Southern provinces we saw in the closest
vicinity two entirely different nations—of course, at war with each other
from times immemorial. One of them, the Guarani, of the widely spread
Tupi tribe, showing the well-known eagle profile of the North American
Indians, first-rate pedlars and fishers, generally keep near the large
rivers; while the other, the Coroados, or Ca-en-gangues (forest-men), as
they call themselves,t more warlike and high-handed, carrying off and
enslaving whomsoever they can, do not use canoes at all, and prefer the
wooded ravines of the lateral valleys or the grass-grown ridges of the
Campos, where the fat tapir, the wild hog, and the nimble deer fall an
easy prey to their never-failing arrows and heavy lances. Their oblique
eyes, short nose, and high cheek-bones, strongly remind one of the
Mongolian type, though by this remark I would not imply their direct
Asiatic origin.

A few years ago they fought a bloody though unsuccessful war
against the white imtruders, and were pursued and punished for it by
the Portuguese Government in the most ruthless way, while many tribes
of their hereditary foes, the softer Guarani, bent their necks without
much difficulty beneath the heavy yoke of the Jesuits.

These Guarani, although their outward appearance and character
recall the old Mexican tribes, seem to have come, in all probability,
from the South, the Paraguay of to-day, and the Southern provinces of

* The slave population of Brazil, scraped together from all parts of Africa, and
showing a great variety of types, also seems to newly arrived Europeans to be wrought
after one and the same model—a sort of primitive negro; the general similitude of
colour and hair causing the marked differences of physiognomy and cranium to be
overlooked.

{ Martius calls them Camés.


INTRODUCTION. 18

Brazil, and to have spread thence all over the continent. Close to the
descendants of these brave wanderers, divided into a great number of
vastly differing tribes (many of which have created for themselves
idioms quite unintelligible to the rest), we find the usually more
barbarous tribes of the real aborigines; and we must needs ask our-
selves,—without finding a satisfactory answer though,—the reason of
these different modes of life under the same outward conditions ; why,
of two nations of the same race, one should spend half its life on the
water, while the other, living but a few miles off, can neither build a
canoe nor handle a paddle.

Considering the Babylonish chaos of Indian languages (Martius
counting for Brazil alone about two hundred and fifty different idioms),
the valuable labours of the Jesuits can searcely be too highly estimated.
They first formed and fixed grammatically the Guarani or Tupi language
(lingoa geral), and introduced it in their Missions; and now it has
become the popular language in all the North of Brazil, especially im
the provinces of Paré and Amazonas, where it is used, almost exclu-
sively, by all the Indian settlers and half-castes of the most diverging
tribes.

Martius has given a most valuable account of Indian customs, and
vocabularies of a great number of their languages.

That anthropophagy is still practised by several of these tribes,
unfortunately, is a fact which cannot be doubted. So with the Miranhas
on the Amazon, and the Parentintins on the Madeira and Rio Negro ;
but equally certain it is that very many tribes have been falsely accused
of it by the intruding whites, who sought to have an excuse for their
cruel treatment of them. Usually, only those slain in their combats,
or prisoners of war, are served at these horrid banquets; and this not
without a certain choice, as a woman of the Miranha tribe assured us at
Mandos. She vowed that they never ate ‘Christaos,” that is, civilised
people, whose flesh does not savour well, on account of their eating salt !
But such assertions cannot be implicitly trusted, as Indians very often
take a pleasure in deceiving or making fun of their curious white
questioners. So they have a trick of returning for answer one of the
words of the question proposed, which often gives rise to the queerest
misunderstandings.*

* We took with us as servant a young Cayow4 Indian, from the Aldeamento de
Santo Ignacio, in the province of Parana, who answered to the name of ‘ Chama,”



14 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

Only a few of the independent tribes have fixed abodes. Most. of
them pull down vr burn their light sheds, whenever they think fit, and
then wander forth, often for many miles,—the wives carrying all the
household implements, the stores, and even the spare arrows of their
husbands,—in quest of better hunting-grounds, to gather the ripe, wild
fruit, or to visit their own plantations of Indian corn and mandioc, which
this unsteady, wandering life does not hinder them from growing.

These two plants, which certainly had been cultivated for ages before
the discovery of America, still number with the most important pro-
ductions of Brazil, both for Indians and Europeans. The corn (milho),
grown especially in the South as fodder for horses and mules, yields a
coarse flour (fuba), which, cooked to a thick pap—a sort of polenta—is,
together with black beans, the chief dish of the working population of
the provinces of Minas Geraes and Rio de Janeiro.

Of the Mandioe root, which flourishes throughout the country from.
North to South, there are ‘two kinds—the Aipim (Manihot aip/), much
like potatoes when boiled, and the Mandioca brava (Manihot utilissima), of
which, after extracting the very poisonous juice,* the farina is prepared,
—a coarse-grained meal which, without any further preparation, takes
the place of our bread on the tables of Brazilians, both high and low.
Wheat and rye are only grown in the German colonies of the South, and
not in sufficient quantities for the demand of the towns, which are chiefly
supplied from North America and Europe. Rice, of several excellent
qualities, is largely cultivated, particularly in Maranhao. It is, together
with black beans (feijao) and sun-dried meat (carne seca), a daily dish
with almost all classes of the population.

All these articles are rather high-priced, as their culture is not so
lucrative as that of the exported articles, coffee, sugar, and cotton ; and it
is, therefore, neglected on the large estates.

Coffee can be grown almust everywhere, though, in the hottest
districts of the North, it must be planted in the shade of larger trees, to
get a good crop; and in Rio Grande and Parana it thrives but poorly,
and is grown only for domestic use. The provinces that export most are
Sao Paulo, Rio de Janeiro, and the Eastern part of Minas Geraes.

that is, when it just suited his convenience. On closer investigation we found out this
was believed to be his name, from his regularly answering ‘‘Chamé4,” to the question,
‘Como se chama?” (What are you called ?)

* The fine starchy sediment of this juice is the tapioca.


ot

INTRODUCTION. a

Cotton, several varieties of which are indigenous to the soil, and were
cultivated by the Indians long before the discovery of America, flourishes
in the North (where, however, the quality is second-rate), as well as in
the South, where it is a¢quiring greater importance as an article of
export, in spite of the considerable fluctuations in price to which it has
been subject.

Spread. over almost as wide a range is the sugar-cane, which
was introduced by the Portuguese as early as the beginning of the
sixteenth century; as sugar, and pao brazil, the well-known dyewood
which gave the whole country its name,* were the articles first exported
by them. The work in the sugar-cane fields is said to be very laborious
and irksome; and Brazilians will be found to assert that sugar-cane culture
will come to a sudden stop, upon the abolition of slavery, as free workmen
never would undertake it.

Another indigenous plant, of exceedingly wide range, whose culture
might be much improved and increased, is the tobacco, which is held in
high esteem to the present day by many of the wild Indian tribes. The
big cigars, more than two feet long, with which their Pajés (usually the
cleverest of the tribe, uniting the treble dignity of priest, magician, and
medicine-man) besmoke their patients, certainly are the originals of the
“weeds,” which no Christian gentleman can do without nowadays.

Some attempts to cultivate Chinese tea in Sa0 Paulo and Minas
proved a sad failure, as the quality produced was a very inferior one;
whether from the effect of the climate or bad management, I cannot tell.
Certainly the patient, slender-fingered son of the ‘Celestial Empire ”
seems to be better suited to the subtle work of gathering and sorting the
leaves than the negro. But they have an excellent equivalent for it in
Brazil—the Paraguay tea (Ilex Paraguayensis), also called Herva Maté,
or Congonha, growing wild everywhere in the Southern provinces, and
forming already a considerable article of export. An infusion of the
dried and pounded leaves, imbibed through a delicately plaited little tube
(bombilha), is the indispensable national beverage of all classes in the La
Plata States, Paraguay, and the South of Brazil, while the North has
cacao and guarand instead. Of these and other productions of the forests
of the North, such as the eacdo and the caoutchouc, hereafter.

* The first discoverers called it Terra da Vera Cruz, or Terra da Santa Cruz (Land

of the True, or of the Holy Cross), and not till long after was this denomination
changed for the name of the much-appreciated wood.



16 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

By reason of excellent natural pastures of great extent (campos or
prairies), the Southern provinces, Rio Grande, Parana, Santa Catharina,
and Sao Paulo, are particularly well adapted for cattle-breeding. The
interior of Piauhy and Pernambuco, and the isles of Marajé and Goyaz,
also breed fine cattle; but, on the whole, this branch of farming has not
yet obtained the attention it merits, and Brazil is much in the rear even
of its next neighbours, the Spanish Republics, in respect not only of the
quality of the cattle, but also of utilising the different parts of the
slaughtered animals, the tallow, hides, bones, hoofs, and horns.

However, it was neither the fat pasturage nor the fertility of the soil
that proved the strongest allurements to the first immigrants after its
discovery. It was the metallic wealth of the country. We owe the first
descriptions of the interior to small troops of gold-grecdy adventurers,
who had set out to seek the Dorado, a fabulous land of gold and diamonds,
created by their own vivid imaginations. Especially the settlers of the
former Capitania de Sa0 Vicente (the present Sao Paulo), distinguished
themselves by their bold explorations; and the province of Minas Geraes
bears, to the present day, the name they gave it for its mines.

Although these latter are no longer thought of such high importance,
the due development of agriculture being considered (and with reason) to
be a much sounder basis of progress for the country, yet several large
mines are successfully worked at Morro-Velho and its vicinity by English
companies. Mato Grosso also is very rich in ore; and the old mines near
the sources of the Guaporé, for example, were abandoned only on account
of the difficulty of communication and of the fevers.

Diamonds also were found shortly after the discovery ; and here again
the province of Minas ranks foremost, with its diamond-washings in the
Jequitinhonha, the Diamantina, and the Bagagem, where the renowned
‘Estrella do Sul” was found. Though in the last century the European
merchants, anxious not to overstock the market, and so lessen the value
of their Indian supplies, would not recognise Brazilian diamonds as such,
they yet have forced their way; and it is not saying too much to assert
that the greater part of the diamonds worn throughout the world come
from Brazil.

Of course there is no question yet of cutting them there, as manufac-
turing activity, no matter on what scale, cannot be thought of in a
country where hands are so scarce and where wages and provisions are so
high. Everything that demands ‘‘mao obra,” from the silk dress and


INTRODUCTION. 17

the piano down to the palito (tooth-pick), is still imported from Europe
and North America, and, in spite of the long voyage and the enormous
custom-house duties, is cheaper than if it were manufactured on the
spot.

The greater the distance from the sea, the greater, of course, are the
difficulties of conveyance. The want of good, easy ways of communi-
cation has been one of the chief drawbacks not only to Brazil, but to all
the South American States. Nowhere in the whole Continent, a hundred
miles from the coast, is there a regular carriage-road to be found; and
the mule, or, at best, the creaking ox-cart, with its enormous wooden
wheels fixed on the axletrees, are the indispensable vehicles. It is true
that conveyance on mules’ backs is the only one possible on paths which,
in the rainy season, are knee-deep, and sometimes breast-deep, with mud,
which show ascents of twenty or thirty feet in a hundred, and which
sometimes are obstructed by huge masses of loose rocks and stones; and
very often it requires all the sagacity of the tropeiro (mule-driver), and
all the tough perseverance and sure-footedness of his mules, to bring
themselves and their loads whole and sound to their several destinations.

In consequence of these difficulties, and of the exceeding slowness of
progress (scarcely ten or twelve miles a day), this mode of transport is so
dear that even valuable products, like coffee, do not pay the cost of
conveyance to a seaport, if the distance exceeds three hundred miles,
and as the freight, moreover, necessarily packed in small colli, and
loaded and unloaded so often, is exposed to all sorts of risks, it is clear
that the central parts of the continent are in a sort of continual blockade,
that allows neither agriculture nor trade to prosper.

In Brazil considerable exertions have been made, within the last
eighteen years, to remedy this state of things; and these efforts are to
be rated the more highly, seeing that the cost of fresh means of com-
munication is very great—about three times more than in Germany—and
immediate financial advantages can scarcely be expected from any such
enterprises. But as they are indispensable for progress, and as the gain
from an ethno-economical point of view cannot be denied, it certainly
devolves on the Government to build roads and railways, to intersect rivers
with canals, and to establish lines of steamers, be the pecuniary sacrifices
never so great.

Since the opening, in 1854, of the first Brazilian railway (the Little
Mauna Railroad) that leads from Rio de Janeiro to the foot of the Serra, a

c



18 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

distance of 17 kilometres, five other railroads of 634 kilometres have been
constructed up to 1867. The most considerable of them, the Don Pedro
II., is without any doubt the largest enterprise of this kind in South
America. Leading from Rio de Janeiro over the Serra do Mar, it has
already an extent of more than 200 kilometres, and will certainly on
some future day be the chief mode of communication for the provinces of
Minas, Goyaz, and Mato Grosso.

Next to, it in importance ranks the Sao Paulo Railway, leading from
the port of Santos to the interior of the province, the passage of the Serra
being effected by means of stationary engines and a steel rope. In the
present day, when any declivity may be freely encountered after Fell’s
system, it certainly would have been constructed otherwise. Then follow
the Bahia and Pernambuco railroads, with an extent of about 124 kilo-
metres each up to the present date, both designed for the purpose of
connecting the upper Sao Francisco Valley with the coast. They prosper
even less than the others, leading for the most part through waste,
uncultivated tracts. A little better off is the Cantagallo Railroad, of
about 50 kilometres, leading from the Villa Nova, in the province of Rio,
to Cachocira at the foot of the Serra. It is to be conducted up to Novo
Friburgo, an old Swiss colony. Besides these, preparatory surveys have
recently been made for new lines in the provinces of Rio Grande do Sul,
Bahia, Rio Grande do Norte, &e., by which new districts, now almost
worthless, will be opened to industry and trade.

The above-mentioned Little Maua Railroad is connected with a carriage-
road leading up the steep Serra to Petropolis, a little town in which
flaxen-haired children playing in the streets, and their native accent,
though mixed up with a sad Portuguese, remind the German strongly of
“ Home, sweet Home,” on the other side of the ocean. Unfortunately
this colony, founded in 1845, is very il-adapted for agriculture, the
ground bemg rough and rocky, with steep slopes on which it is impos-
sible to work with the plough. The inhabitants depend chiefly on the
foreigners, who, following the example of the Imperial family, there
spend the summer months, to escape the heat and sometimes the yellow
fever of the capital.

From Petropolis the normal carriage-road of the Company Uniao e
Industria, constructed by my father from 1855—1862, leads to Juiz de
Fora, in the province of Minas, a distance of 147 kilometres. It was
designed to be extended to Ouro Preto, the capital of the province, and


INTRODUCTION. 19

to be connected with a line of steamers on the Rio das Velhas. It crosses
the richest coffee-growing districts of Rio de Janeiro and Minas, and has
long ago repaid the vast outlay involved in large rock-blasting operations
in the Serra do Mar, and in the construction of an iron bridge over the
Parahyba of 150 metres length, and the like works, by augmenting
the value of the land and increasing the productiveness of the whole
district.

With the great extent of the coast of the Empire, the steam naviga-
tion is, of course, of the greater importance, as the land communications
are by no means easy, Considering that, before the time of steamers, a
Government order took on an average about a month to get from the
capital to Para, or to any seaport of Rio Grande do Sul; and again, that
at least six weeks elapsed before the decree reached Mandos, and about
the same time, or more, before it got from Rio Grande, by the River
Plate and the Paraguay, to Cuyaba, the capital of Mato Grosso, one can
form a slight idea of the difficulties to be surmounted by the Central
Government. Just as in China, the president of some distant province
might have been driven away and the Government overthrown without
the capital being aware of it for two months or more; and indeed, at the
time of the Declaration of Independence, the Northern provinces, with
Pard at their head, were on the eve of siding with Portugal, while at
Rio and in the whole South the Revolution had long got the upper
hand.

Now all this is greatly changed. Besides several Transatlantic lines
(from Southampton, Liverpool, Antwerp, Hamburg, Bordeaux, Marseilles )
and a New York line, all of which touch at Rio, Bahia, and Pernambuco,
there is also a Brazilian line of steamers, which links all the minor ports,
and corresponds with the Amazon line and with those on the River Plate
and Paraguay. A voyage along the coast, revealing in quick succession
the rocky cones of the Serra, proud cities like Bahia and Pernambuco,
idyllic fisher-villages half hidden under palm-groves, and dreary stretches
of sandy beach, is certainly one of the most captivating that can be
fancied.

But while the blue Atlantic with ease bears the mightiest steamers
on its broad bosom, and while this part of it generally deserves the
appellation given to it by the Portuguese, wm mar de leite (a sea of
milk )—as neither frequent squalls nor dangerous clifis imperil the vessels
——the rivers of the Empire, with the exception of the Amazon and the

c 2



20 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

Paraguay, together with the La Plata, have their full share of currents,
crags, and obstructions.

If the Parana, with its large affluents that reach to the heart of
Minas, the Sao Francisco, the Rio Doce, the Jequitinhonha and the
affluents of the Amazon, the Tocantins, Araguaya, Xingi, Tapajos,
Madeira, &c., were perfectly navigable, Brazil would not indeed have
to look out for railways and roads just yet. Unfortunately all these
rivers have, at different points of their course, either real falls—as the
Sao Francisco, not far above its mouth, has the grand fall of Paulo
Affonco—or currents that scarcely allow a canoe or a flat boat to pass,
and thus thousands of square miles of the richest soil have continued
for ages to remain unexplored, uncultivated, and almost totally unin-
habited.

Incredible as it may appear at first sight, it is nevertheless true
that the fate of the Southern provinces of Brazil, the western parts
of Sao Paulo, Parana, and the south of Minas and Mato Grosso, would
be a very different one if strong currents and the lofty falls of Sete
Quedas, unvisited by any European for two hundred years since the
missionary expeditions of the Jesuits, did not render the Parana unfit
for navigation. If on that chief arm of the La Plata Brazilian men-of-
war had been stationed, if men and war material could, have come by its
affluents, the Iguacu, Paranapanema, and Ticté, the war with Paraguay
would have come to an end much sooner, or probably would not have
been begun at all.

Notwithstanding the magnificent water-net of the South American
Continent, that strikes any one on the map, as yet only the La Plata
and the Paraguay, and the Amazon, with the Lower Madeira, are
ploughed regularly by steamers ; and, in all likelihood, steam navigation
‘n the interior will, for many years to come, be limited to these chief
arteries, unless the upper navigable parts of the Araguaya (a tributary
of the Tocantins) and the Amazon are connected by some economical
railroad with its lower course, as is proposed to be done on the
Madeira.

If, from the preceding pages the reader has gathered that in Brazil
there is a wide field for human intelligence and energy, the following
short. historical sketch will show why the country has as yet failed
to reach a higher degree of development, with all its great gifts of
Nature.


INTRODUCTION. 21

From the period of the discovery of Brazil by the Portuguese* to
the Declaration of Independence in 1822, it was always kept under by
the mother country, to the extent indeed of preventing all progress.
No less a personage than a Portuguese king himself, Don Joao IV.
(who died in 1656), in a conversation with the French ambassador,
with singular sincerity called Brazil his vaca de leite (milch-cow). Fvery
measure that might have tended in the least to strengthen the colony,
was strictly suppressed, however advantageous it might have proved.
Of course nothing was done for schools, Portugal never having distin-
guished itself in that respect; and, in the most inconsiderate fashion,
immense tracts of land, so called capitanias, were given away to courtiers
who never intended doing anything in the way of colonising or culti-
vating them, or to young noblemen who had become objectionable to
their families by the extravagance of their lives, and who, of all men,
were least fit for the difficult duties of colonisation and administration,
though it must be remarked that, among these first Donatarios, there
were some excellent men, such as Duarte Coelho, founder of Pernambuco,
and Martin Affoneo de Souza, renowned for his deeds in India, and
founder of the city of Sao Paulo.

One of the privileges of these Donatarios was to enslave ‘ Indios
or Gentios,” wherever they or their subordinates could get them, and
to sell certain numbers of them “ tax-free”? at Lisbon. Of course, the
settlers made large use of this right; and, also of course, the Indians
sought to revenge themselves by sudden attacks and all sorts of cruelties;
for which they were, in their turn, pursued only the more pitilessly.
By-and-bye the Order of the Jesuits, that soon after its establishment
had got a sure footing in Brazil,—especially at Bahia,—became a mighty
aid to the settlers, protected their run-away slaves, and generally
knew how to arrange things so well that a Carta Regia (Order of the
King) gave them the right to plan laws for their regulation. In due
time these appeared, and were not to the disadvantage of the Padres,
as may be imagined. They ordained, for example, among other things,
that any settler asserting a claim to a slave, without being able fully

* Alvares de Cabral landed, in 1500, first near Monte Pascal, close to Porto Seguro,
and, in the following year, he and the Italian, Américo Vespucci, set out with a small
flotilla to sail round the supposed isle. They went along the whole west, and dis-
covered, in January, 1502, the magnificent bay of Rio de Janeiro, which they believed to

be the mouth of a large river. This error generated the name of the city and
province.



22 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

to substantiate it, should lose it entirely, and that: the slave should
then be the property of the Order; and as, besides, by another Carta
Regia, only the Indians captured in “just” war could be considered
as slaves, the colonists were entirely in the hands of the Holy Fathers,
and naturally embraced with great zeal the proposal of the ‘ philan-
thropic” Mexican bishop, Las Casas, to import African slaves, the
right of whose possession it would be easier to prove. They availed
themselves, on a large scale, of the permission given in 1511 of intro-
ducing negro slaves, without payment of any duties, into the new colony,
the more so as, from continual pursuit and ill-treatment, the Indian
tribes living near the sea either were annihilated or had retired to the
forests of the interior. Nor were they in security there, for, in spite
of Papal Bulls which declared them to be free, greedy hordes of
Paulistas (down to the seventeenth century) made great raids as far
as the Jesuit Missions on the Parand and Uruguay for the purpose of
fetching Indian slaves; and, even to the present day, many an Indian
child is sold in the forests of the Amazon and Para for a knife, or a
hatchet, or a few beads.

The difficulties of the young colony were soon increased by outward
foes. The Governador Geral, Men de Sa, appointed in 1549, and
residing at the Cidade do Salvador (the present Bahia), had immediately
to make preparations against the French; who, under the leadership of
the Huguenot Villegaignon, and with the aid of some Indian tribes, their
allies, had erected an intrenched camp on the bay of Rio de Janciro
(then Cidade de Sao Sebastiao). In January, 1567, a great battle was
fought there, which cost the brave Men de Sa, nephew to the
Governador, his life, and whieh ended in the defeat of the French ; and
Maranhao, which they had taken in 1614, was re-conquered by the Por-
tuguese.*

The Dutch were more pertinacious in their desire for annexation. In
1624 they took Bahia; in 1630 Pernambuco, which began to prosper
well under the brief rule of the Prince Maurice of Nassau; and in 1641
Maranhiao ; but, as they were not seconded sufficiently by the mother
country, just when difficulties arose, the Portuguese succeeded, with

* During the war of the Succession to the Spanish throne they revenged them-
selves, however, for all these failures. In 1710 there came a French fleet under
Duclere ; and, in 1711, a stronger one under Duguay-Trouin, who bombarded, ran-
sacked, and plundered Rio de Janeiro.


INTRODUCTION. 23

some difficulty, in mastering them, and finally driving them away in
1654.

Unfortunately the period of peace which followed these victories, and
during which the internally effervescing condition of things began to
clear and settle, was used by the Portuguese Government only to get up
« kind of old Japanese system of isolation, by which it was intended to
keep the colony in perpetual tutelage. In consequence of this even now,
after the lapse of half a century since it violently separated itself,
Brazilians generally entertain a bitter grudge against the mother
country. All the trade to and from Brazil was engrossed by Portugal ;
every functionary, down to the last clerk, was Portuguese.* Any other
Kuropean of scientific education was looked at with suspicion; and
particularly they sought to prevent by all means the exploration of the
interior, as they feared not only that the eyes of the natives might be
opened to their mode of administration, but also that such travellers
might side with the Spaniards in their long dispute regarding the
boundaries of the two nations, as the French astronomer, La Condamine,
had done.

This question, which arose shortly after the discovery, and was
hushed up only during the short Union of both the Crowns (from 1581—
1640), broke out with renewed vigour every now and then, maugre the
Treaty of Tordesilhas in 1494; according to which, by a bull of Pope
Alexander VI., the infamous Borgia, the transmarine possessions of the
two nations were to be divided by a meridian drawn. arbitrarily over land
and main; and in spite of a subsequent confirmation of this strange
partition of the terrestrial globe by Pope Julius I., im 1506. Both
these extraordinary documents dating from a period when the real
extent of our planet, and the situation of its various parts, were utterly
unknown, either a stout belief m their own infallibility, or a strong dose
of sublime audacity, was certainly required to induce the successors of
St. Peter ever to impose such an award.

’

* To the present day the Brazilian calls the Dutch cheese queijo do reino, cheese
from the kingdom, that is to say, from Portugal; brown Indian pepper, pimenta do
reino ; because these articles and many others, by no means produced on Portuguese
soil, reached the colony only through Portugal, of course at three times their original
price. Formerly in Brazil, as still in Bolivia, the costliest plate might be found in
opulent houses, but not enough knives and glasses, since plate of true Portuguese
manufacture could be had more easily, and comparatively cheaper, than steelware or
crockery.



24 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

By the Treaty of Sao Idefonso, in 1777, both parties having long
felt how impracticable the old arrangements were—at least, for . their
American colonies—the boundaries were fixed upon the principle of the
uti possidetis, at any rate so far as the imperfect knowledge of the interior
allowed; but this effort also proved to be vain, as the opportunity of a
peaceful understanding between the two nations had been permitted to
elapse (intentionally, as is thought) by the Portuguese without a final
clearing up of the disputed points. Arms were taken up anew, but until
now they failed to bring about any durable results; and the unsolved
question descended as an evil heritage to their respective heirs, Brazil,
and the South American Republics. A few years ago it gave rise to
the terrible war with Paraguay; and it will lead to fresh conflicts
between Brazil and the Argentine Republic, which, though closely allied
against the common enemy, will sooner or later have to fight it out,
especially if the districts in question be opened to trade and civilisation
by the world-transforming agency of steam.

A new era began for the country in 1808, with the transmigration of
the king Don Joao VI., who sought and found a refuge from the French
erenadiers in the long-neglected colony. As it were at one blow, it rose
to an equality of rank with the mother country, which, for a time, indeed
had to play a secondary part. During the thirteen years which Don
Joao VI. spent in Brazil, he repealed a great many of the short-sighted
and narrow-minded measures which had obstructed all progress ; such,
for example, as one passed so late as 1784, which prohibited the
Brazilians to manufacture any tissues, save the very coarsest cotton for
the clothing of the negroes. But, unfortunately, he roused to a blazing
flame the old hatred against the Portuguese, by filling all the offices with
them, and by creating sinecures for the courtiers who had migrated with
him,

A Revolution, which broke out at Pernambuco im 1812, was casily
subdued, as the neighbouring provinces, headed by Bahia, positively
refused to joi it; but the so-called Constitutional Revolution of
Portugal, in 1820, found a loud echo in Brazil. At Para and Bahia,
and, finally at Rio de Janeiro, the Portuguese troops sided with the
insurgents. The Crown Prince himself took the lead, and, in February,
1821, the King was forced to recognise the constitution, yet to be
drawn up by the Cortes at Lisbon. But, as this required before all
things the return of the King, and, besides, was exactly calculated


INTRODUCTION, 25

to reduce the colony to its former state of dependence, the enthusiasm of
the disappointed Brazilians suffered a severe shock; new disorders
followed; and, after a stormy session of the Chambers, the King was
summoned to aecept for Brazil the Spanish Constitution of 1812. He
assented to everything; but, within an hour after the retirement of
the King, the sitting of the Assembly was arrested by a volley fired
through the windows by a company of Portuguese riflemen: and Don
Joao VI. availed himself of the panic of the capital to withdraw all his
concessions, and to set sail for Lisbon three days afterwards (on the
26th of April, 1821), leaving the Crown Prince, Don Pedro, as Regent,
with extensive powers.

The Portuguese Cortes, however, could not yet make up their
mind either to abandon their old system of keeping down and tutoring
the colony, or to concede to it any privileges. Continual chicanes and
encroachments upon his rights drove the Prince Regent at last openly
to head the revolutionary party. At Ipiranga, near Sao Paulo, having
received another friendly missive from Lisbon, he raised, on the 7th of
September, 1822, the ery of “‘ Independencia ou morte !” which was echoed
with enthusiasm throughout the country. On his return to Rio, he was
unanimously declared emperor on the 21st of September, and crowned as
such on the Ist of December. In about a year’s time all the provinces
were vacated by the Portuguese troops; and in 1825, chiefly through
the mediation of England, Brazil was acknowledged as an indepen-
dent empire.

But the inner commotions continued, and were not even soothed
by a new Constitution, drawn up in 1823, and sworn to by the Emperor
in 1824. New revolts in Pernambuco, and some of the other Northern
provinces, and a war of three years with the Argentine Republic, which
ended in 1828 by Brazil giving up Banda Oriental, annexed only
eleven years before, disturbed and weakened the land. The foreign
soldiers, enlisted for this war, and retained after its conclusion to keep
down the Opposition, and the extravagant private life of the Emperor,
who recklessly trampled down the honour of respectable families,
provoked dissatisfaction and murmurs, which rose to the highest pitch
when he insisted upon carrying on a most unpopular war in Portugal
to defend the rights of his daughter, Dona Maria da Gloria (in whose
favour he had abdicated the Portuguese Crown), against his brother, Don
Miguel. In April, 1831, Don Pedro I., so enthusiastically raised to the



26 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

Brazilian throne only nine years before, was forced to abdicate it, deserted
and betrayed by every one, in behalf of his younger son, Pedro.

The next period was the most disturbed one that the young Empire
had yet witnessed. Slave revolts at Bahia, a civil war in the South,
which almost cost it the province of Rio Grande do Sul, and the bloody
rebellion known as the Guerra dos Cabanos, in Para and Amazon, from
1835 to 1837, followed cach other quickly. In this last revolt, the
Brazilians had stirred up the Indians and mestizoes against the abhorred
Portuguese, without considering that they should not be able to quench
the fire they had themselves kindled. In a short time, the fury of the
whole coloured population turned against all whites, Brazilians and
Portuguese alike, without any distinction. More than 10,000 persons
ure said to have perished in this Guerra dos Cabanos; and, to the
present day, those terrible times and the barbarous cruelties committed
by the Indians, half-castes, and mulattoes, continue to be talked of with
awe in the two provinces.

A revolution in Minas, got up by the personal ambitions of a few
political leaders, rather than emanating from the spirit of the people, and
the war against Rosas, the Dictator of the Argentine Republic, passed
over Brazil without leaving deep traces, at least when compared with the
last war against Paraguay; which, besides the stimulus of the old
differences about boundaries, was occasioned by the endless vexations and
restrictions, with which the Dictator Lopez strove to ruin the Brazilian
trade on the Paraguay, and to prejudice the province of Mato
Grosso. This despot, cracked up by many European journals as a
gallant hero and devoted patriot, at first imitated and, at last, surpassed
the good examples of his predecessors, Dr. Francia, the first “ Supremo ”
of Paraguay, who, out of distrust, had detained Humboldt’s companion,
the Botanist Bonpland, for many ycars in the country ; and of old Lopez,
his father, who. in 1855 directed the firing-upon of the Waterwitch, a
steamer fitted out by the United States for a scientific expedition. Even
before the war, the younger Lopez indulged himself in the strangest
encroachments upon the personal rights, not of Brazilians only, but
of Germans, Englishmen, North Americans, and Frenchmen; and even
his own countrymen, especially those belonging to the better classes,
whose opposition he had to fear, were either made away with in one way
and another, or expelled.

It is inconceivable why Brazil so long continued to look on inactively


INTRODUCTION. 27

while Lopez was ereeting his fortress Ihimaita, and why it should never
have thought of placing its army and navy on a better footing, or, at
least, of epening a road to the menaced Mato Grosso, so easily to be cut
off entirely. The importance of such a way of communication was proved
but too clearly by the fate of a detachment of 3,000 men, inadvertently
sent by land, even in the absence of roads, to the ill-fated province, which
had been devastated already by the Paraguayan hordes. Two-thirds of
them perished miserably on the way; the rest arrived there, after eight
months of terrible suffermgs, in such a condition that they had, all of
them, to be sent to the hospitals. Besides cholera and small-pox, hunger
and privations of every kind made sad havoc among the Brazilians, cer-
tainly more than the Paraguayan bullets.

Notwithstanding several decided victories over the latter, the
Brazilians never knew how to profit by them; and the restless enemy,
in whose ranks the Dictator had maintained the strictest discipline and
unyielding courage in the face of all privations, always contrived to rally,
to take up new positions of great strength, and to receive fresh auxiliary
troops and provisions. The heaviest blame in this respect falls to the
Marquez de Caxias, who was entrusted with the conduct of the Brazilian
army. His total want of energy and of military talent, and his perpetual
hesitations, caused the disastrous war to last five long years. Only when
he was superseded in the command by the Comte d’Eu, son-in-law of the
Emperor, were the operations carried on more actively; and they suc-
ceeded at last in surrounding the fugitive despot and rendering him
inoffensive for the future.

Well-nigh incredible to Europeans will appear the cruelties of this
petty tyrant; who, under a gold-embroidered uniform, bore the wild
heart of the Pampas Indian relishing the tortures of his fellow-men.
Especially when he saw that there was no help for it but to surrender or
to die, his fury became boundless. No one better than a_half-wild
Guarani could hope to escape his suspicions ; and whoever was suspected
was doomed. A German engineer (Mr. F. y. T.), a highly accomplished
young man who had been chief of the Paraguayan Telegraph system,
assured me at Rio de Janeiro, whither he had been brought by the
Brazilians, that hundreds and hundreds of prisoners of all nations,
superior Paraguayan officers, priests, and ladies, had been cruelly
tortured, whipped to death, or shot, very often without the shghtest
shade of a reason. His woeful tale of sufferimgs was strictly confirmed



28 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

by the iateresting book of Major von Versen, who spent the last
two years of the war in the Paraguayan camp, and who, like v. T\,
had been sentenced to death by Lopez, and had had a narrow escape.
And this ferocious barbarian, who moreover had shown throughout
the contest a cowardice and a petty care for his own Kgo, surpassing
all bounds ; who was grand only in respect of the cold selfishness with
which he rejected all proposals of peace, as they of course involved his
exile, and which enabled him to look quietly on while the whole nation
perished for him; this man was praised by a portion of the European
press (the Belgian especially) as a gallant hero, as the brave defender of
his country against foreign usurpation |

Brazil, it is true, has to make amends for more than one wrong, as
well in its external as in its internal affairs; but (omitting Paraguay) in
comparison with the other South American States,—Chile excepted,—it
shines like a green oasis amid the desert of these so-called republics,
which are for ever wavering between anarchy and despotism.

If the Brazilians, in apology for the backwardness of their country,
call it a new one, compared with even the United States, they ccrtainly
are right in some respects; as, only since its freedom from Portuguese
mismanagement could anything be done for its progress and improve-
ment, or any steps be taken for the systematic development of its natural
riches.

On the whole, it seems as if, since the departure of the Emperor Don
Pedro IJ., Europe took a livelier interest in the Transatlantic Monarchy.
Let us hope that this interest will be durable, and that both parties will
derive advantage from it.


CHAPTER I.

FROM RIO DE JANETRO
TO THE RAPIDS OF THE
MADEIRA.

Rio de Janeiro.—Bahia.—Per-
nambuco. — Parahyba do
Norte. — Ceara. — Maranhao.
—Par4é.—Amazon.—Rio Ne-
gro.— Mandos.— Lower Ma-
deira.— Seringueiros.— Praia
de Tamandua.

EF the emerging of a flat,
y) dreary coast is hailed
with joy by any one
who but for a few days
has felt himself the foot-
ball of the waves, cer-
tainly the magnificent
Bay of Rio de Janeiro,
with the bold outlines
of its surrounding peaks
and its lovely palm-

covered isles and. islets,
must delight the heart
of the sea-weary wanderer. The bare, strangely shaped cones of the
Sugarloaf and of the Corcovado, the singularly flat top of the Gavia
(“round top’), and the rugged blue Serra dos Orgaos and Serra da
Kistrella, had long been dear old friends of ours : yet they impressed us
anew when, in November, 1867, we took a last look at them and other
less inviting friends from the deck of the Larand, that bravely fought
her way through the blue waves, leaving to her left Santa Cruz, an old
fort defending the entrance of the bay, and to her right the Pao
d’Assucar, the first of a majestic row of towering cones.

None of the other ports of Brazil can contest the palm of beauty



30 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

with the Capital, emphatically called the “Cidade Heroica,” although
the charms so easily imparted by a rich tropical vegetation are the same,
more or less, with all of them.

Banta is the first of them touched by the steamer on her way from
Rio to Para. It does not offer anything very interesting except its
public gardens, whence one may overlook the bay and port from beneath
the cool shade of some groups of beautiful old mangueiras.

Still less interesting is the neighbouring little port of Macryo, the
eapital of the province of Alagoas.

But at Pernampuco the trouble of going ashore is well repaid either
by a visit to the new parts of the city, that are well planned and give a

ENTRY OF THE BAY OF RIO DE JANEIRO, AS SEEN FROM THE CORCOVADO.

more favourable impression than those of Rio, for instance, or by a visit
to picturesque Oxtnpa on its lovely hill.

On the remarkable coral reef that protects the port are a fine new
lighthouse and a quaint old watech-tower, dating from the time of the
Dutch dominion. J

This coral reef, which has given its name (Iec7/e) to one of the three
suburbs of the town, is extending all along the coast of Brazil, and
allows only at a few places—at Ceara, for instance

of a safe entry for
large vessels,
Paranypa po Norte, situated on the river of the same name at some


FROM RIO DE JANEIRO TO THE RAPIDS OF THE MADEIRA. BL

distance from its mouth, has lonely grass-covered streets and some large,
dreary-looking convents of Benedictines, Franciscans, and Jesuits.

A lively contrast to this melancholy and desolate town is offered by
the pieturesque little fishmg-hamlet Cabedello, beneath its grove of

palms, near the mouth of the river and in front of the anchoring-ground.
The surf-washed brick walls of a small fort built by the Dutch give
a sort of historical background to the peaceful landseape. Once, perhaps,

THE RUGGED PEAKS OF THE ORGAN MOUNTAINS.

its few iron guns had to defend the entry against the Portuguese
Caravelas, and the quiet harbour witnessed scenes of strife and blood-
shed ; but now they are almost covered with luxuriant creepers, and he
there rusting in the sand. The female portion of the inhabitants, mostly
coloured peeple, keep up an industry of Jace-manufacture after somewhat
old fashioned but not the less interesting Portuguese patterns.

North of this pomt the coast of Rro Graxpr po Norte and Crarc



82 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

presents itself as a waste of sandy beach, ever swept by the winds and
the waves, though the latter province is said to offer rich and picturesque
districts m its interior.

In the port, or rather in the open harbour that serves as anchoring-
ground for the increasing commerce of the capital, Fortaleza or Ceara,*
are seen sweeping along like arrows those jangadas we had first seen at
Pernambuco. They are small rafts made of five planks of light timber,
upon which daring fishermen, mostly half-bred Indians and mulattoes,
venture far out to sea. He who would go ashore at Ceara must trust
himself on one of these frail and unstable vehicles, at the risk of having
it turned upside down, or, at the best, of being wetted to the skin by
the raging surf.

Of Manranuio, which, like Parahyba do Norte, gives an impression
of decay, there is little to mention beyond the extraordinary number of
sharks in the port, attracted thither by the slaughter-houses on shore,
and rendering bathing there impossible.

At length, on November 29th, 1867, we reached Pars, at the mouth
of the Para River. The port was full of vessels of all sea-going nations,
and among them was the elegantly shaped Brazilian steam-corvette
Nitheroy. 'The church-towers and convent-turrets, and the far horizon,
with the Ilha das Oncas, make it a very pleasant picture, although the
absence of any commanding height reminds one forcibly of the flat Dutch
landscapes.

The commerce of this city has been rapidly increasing since the year
1850, owing to the improved communication with the immense Amazon
basin, which extends from this favourably situated place to the foot of
the Cordilleras in the West. Steam has been the powerful lever of the
commercial development of Para; and the supporting point of this lever
has, until now, been found only in the immense exuberance of the
vegetation, the fruits, the resins, and the timber of those colossal forests
which extend over nearly 30 degrees of longitude and 20 of latitude.
‘A Industria do Amazonas é quasi toda extractiva,” that is, based on a
sort of robbery, say the Brazilians themselves. Bountiful Nature does
almost everything there, while man scarcely helps her,

The upper parts of the Amazon, the Solimées, and their mighty

* An article of export peculiar to Cearé is the hard brown wax of the carnauba
palm, with which the Brazilians make a sort of dull-burning candles.




CRAFY ON TIE AMAZON AND THE MADEIRA RIVERS.


FROM RIO .DE JANEIRO TO THE.RAPIDS OF. THE MADEIRA. 33

affluents,-were almost a‘terra incognita before steamers divided the yellow
floods of the former. There were only a few slave-dealing regatées,*
tempted: by ‘their “illicit gains, or some clerks of mercantile’ housés at
‘Para, who braved the difficulties of a weary voyage in small boats for
three or four months, to keep up a highiy-Iucrative trade in caoutchouc,
cacao, Pard nuts, several kinds of resin, and dried fish.

Some eight or ten years ago, all this began to improve. The fertility
of the land became better known; and the trade gradually lost the
character of slave-traffic and robbery, at least in the more peopled regions
of the valley; free competition having been, at last, rendered possible.

In the. year 1867, the Government of Brazil finally abandoned the
‘old narrow-minded system of colonial exclusiveness, and declared the
‘Amazon free to the flags of all nations.

: But the results of this measure will be of imaginary advantage only,
until it is extended as well to the various branch streams; for none of
the neighbouring states, Pert, Bolivia, or Venezucla—which alone, even
‘now, have the privilege of navigating them under their national colours—
have the power to eall into life a well-organised steam-flect. The ‘Stars
and Stripes” only could effect a thorough change there; but, as yet, they

The city of Pars does not yield a favourable impression, though there
are some monumental edifices in the main streets that formerly might

are floating on none of those mighty streams.

have had some pretensions to architectural beauty; but they have gone
to decay, and the commerce of to-day is of too recent a date to make any
display in public buildings.

The Cathedral, whose wide bare aisles are of striking grandeur; the
Episcopal Palace, and the Palace of the President, originally intended for

* Regatio, derived from ‘‘ resgatar,” to liberate the prisoners of war of the Indians,
whose lives were forfeited. On this pretext the Regatées, at the same time the pedlars
of those regions, not only kept up a very flourishing and Incrative slave-trade, but
they practised all sorts of cruelties and crimes in the huts of the savage and half-
civilised inhabitants of these countries. On several occasions Liberal deputies have
warmly spoken, in the Chambers at Rio de Janeiro, against this inexcusable abuse,
which still continues, though on a minor scale ; but in vain. The distances are too great,
and the political influence of the interested parties is too powerful for a successful prose-
cution of the criminals.in these out-of-the-way places. To this day Portuguese merchants
keep, on the borders of the Japuré, Puris, Teffé, &c., a great number of aboriginal
‘families in such a degree of dependence, that it differs from real slavery only by the cir-
cumstance that their masters wisely refrain from selling such useful domestic animals!

+ I have just learned that the Imperial Government has, as a special favour,
conceded permission to the North American Company carrying out our railway project on
the Madeira, to send an American’ schooner up’to Santo Antonio under her national flag.

D



34 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

Don Joao VI.’s residence when he came to Brazil, are the most con-
spicuous of them.

The streets are large and regular, but they have an abominable
pavement of a soft ferruginous
sandstone(pedracanga), which
is ground down by the wheels
to a fine red dust, apt to be
extremely annoying.

But Para has one ornament
of which it may well be proud ;
the shady walks beneath plan-
tations of fine trees (mostly

palms), known under the name
of ‘ Tistradas,” and forming
? oO

an agreeable avenue from the

FROM THE OPPOSITE SHORE.

city to the country.
Amid the rich vegetation of
the gardens there 1s one species

AS SEEN

of palm-tree that especially

strikes the foreigner with the

matchless grace of its slender

stem and light feathery leaves,
which are waved about by the

slightest breath of air. It is
the Assai, whose fruit (a small

nut with a dark blue pulp)
makes a very popular and, in-
deed, very refreshing beverage.

Similar beverages are obtained
from the fruits of the Bacaba
and Bataud palms, by passing

ENTRY OF THE BAY OF RIO DE JANEIRO,

the rich pulps through a sieve,
and mixing them with water

and sugar.

As soon as we had completed our official visits to the President and others,
and had made a few private calls, we took our passage on board the Belem, a
first-rate steamer of the Amazon Steam Company; whose commander, Senhor
Leal, formerly in the Brazilian Navy, received us with great kindness.



FROM RIO DE JANEIRO TO THE RAPIDS OF THE MADEIRA. 35

The steamers of this Company are from 500 to 600 tons burden, and
of 200 horse-power. They are well fitted out; the quarter-deck especially
is sheltered against sun and rain by a solid roof, thus forming an agree-
able lounge. Here the meals are taken ; and in the evening the slender
iron columns of the roof support the hammocks, which every one prefers
to the hot beds in the cabins below.

Our company was a very motley one. There was the Brazilian civil
official, deeming it rather hard to be sent to such a place of exile as Serpa
or Mandos; there was the Portuguese Vendeiro, unable to take interest in
anything save his percentages ; and there was the American colonist from
one of the Southern States, who emigrated in disgust at the defeat of his
party, tried life at Santarem at the mouth of the Tapajoz, but found it so
dreadfully “dull” that he is going to move heaven and earth at Para to
get repaid for the cost of his passage home again. There were merchants
from Venezuela and Bolivia, who, coming im their barques for hundreds
of leagues through currents and cataracts, have sold their goods at Para,
and bought others to refreight their boats, which they have left at Serpa
or Manaos. Then there was the officer of the Peruvian navy, come
quietly as a civilian to inspect, in a friendly way, the state of things in
his neighbour’s home, and to report to his Government how much, or
how little, the Brazilians have done within the last few years to protect
these regions against a surprise from his countrymen ;* and last, but not
least, there was the Italian missionary, a long-bearded Capuchin monk,
certainly regretting in his innermost heart that blessed time when cassock
and scapulary could place themselves as insurmountable barriers between
Governments and Indians, and when his Church alone had the privilege
of dealing with the latter. These were our fellow-passengers who peace-
fully extended themselves in their hammocks, side by side, beneath the
sheltering roof of the Belem, indulging in that dreamy dolce fur niente,
inevitably produced by a glaring sun and the soft rocking of a vessel, or
chatting quietly, as the evening breeze slightly roused their drowsy
spirits.

The steamer now passed through the large Bahia de Maraj6, whose

* Tabatinga, the Brazilian frontier fort, against Perd, is in a most dilapidated
state. A Brazilian officer of rank once told me, with that openness which characterises
the educated Brazilian, ‘“O nosso celebre Tabatinga, o baluarte contra o Peru, que
elles chamaio uma fortaleza, 6 antes uma fraqueza!” (Our celebrated Tabatinga, the
bulwark against Pert, that they call a fortress, is rather a weakness.)

D 2



36 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

flat banks are scarcely discernible, leaving us to guess only the wide
mouth of the Tocantins to be where sky and water are melting into one
blue horizon, into the Estreito do Breves, one of those narrow, intricate
channels, through which the powerful Amazon has to send its waters to
the Para. Magnificent groups of Muriti palms line its sides, their broad
waving fans silvered by the brightest of moonshine. At dawn the Belem
touched at GurupA and Porro po Moz, small villages, inhabited by
Indians and half-castes, leaving at the right the singularly shaped flat
hills of Almeirim, the only ones seen on the whole tour. After Prarnna

A JANGADA IN THE BREAKERS.

and Mont Atxere, two other stations of little importance, we reached at
last Sanrargm, at the mouth of the Tapajoz, a prosperous and pretty little
town. There is a certain charm about that sloping hill, covered with
whitewashed houses and cottages, and green gardens, and overlooking a
white beach full of boats and barques of every size. Tempted by the
lovely aspect, we went on shore to stretch our limbs a little, and to
gather some statistical notes, if possible; but we had no idea of the
difficulties of the latter undertaking. We began by asking the pro-
prietor of a little shop, who was sitting quietly on his doorstep, and


FROM RIO DE JANEIRO TO THE RAPIDS OF THE MADEIRA. 37

inhaling the exquisite fragrance of some melons near him, while he
indulged in that broad stare which probably all new arrivals are subjected
to at Santarem: ‘Quantas almas tem aqui?” (How many souls do you
count here?) Uneducated Brazilians never being sure of their L’s and
Ws. “Quantas armas?” (How many arms ?) replied he, raising a pair
of wondering eyes. ‘‘ Well, almost each of us has a gun in the house,
and sometimes two.” ‘Mas nao, senhor, queriamos saber quantos
homens morao neste lugar?” (No, sir, we wish to know how many men
(people) are living here.) “Oh! how many men? Oh, about as many I
think as there are women,” he said smiling, the while archly giving a
customer the required brandy, and pocketing the dirty large coins.
“Mas nao é isso, meu senhor, quantos habitantes desejavamos saber !”
(How many inhabitants? we inquire.) ‘Oh, oh,—isto é outra cousa,
quantos habitantes ?” (Oh, that is a different thing! How many inhabi-
tants?) Great pause. “‘ Pois, habitantes tem muitos!” (Well, inhabi-
tants, there are many here!) Just then the bell of the steamer
began to ring. In despair we hastily purchased some melons, and
hurried on board. How much water will have rolled down the broad
Amazon before one can get informed at Santarem of the number of its
inhabitants ?

The next station is Oxipos, where the breadth of the river is
considerably reduced, while the declivity increases, so as to form a
sort of current. A little fort on the right is scarcely of any
consequence, especially as men-of-war can easily evade it, at least
at high water, by passing through a lake on the right bank, which
connects itself to the main stream by deep channels below and above
Obidos.

The effects of high and low tide are felt here, though 400 miles from
the sea; and it is only the inerease of elevation that prevents it being
felt higher up.

Before passing the mouth of the Madeira, which is not visible on
account of the isles, we reached Srrpa, a village of a dozen or so of huts
and cottages on a high shore, but which may expect a prosperous future
from its favourable position near the Madeira.

Here, as well as at the other stations, we took in some fuel, kept
ready on shore in long, well-arranged piles.

Formerly the Amazon Company kept at Serpa a steam saw-mill, which
they worked with a colony of Portuguese. ‘The number of fine cedar-



88 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

trunks* swept down every year by the Madeira from the shores of the
Beni, is so great that, at the beginning of the high tides, it sufficed for a
few weeks to maintain boats on the river, towing the swimming giants
ashore, to set the saw-mill going all the year round.

Unfortunately this establishment, of which the best hopes were
reasonably entertained, was badly managed, and abandoned after a short
time ; not without the peaceful inhabitants of Serpa having been kept in
a constant agitation by the dissolute workmen, mostly Portuguese,
Englishmen, and Germans. But it is to be hoped that this enterprise,
with the advantages of having large quantities of the finest Brazilian
cedar, and a navigable river to convey it to the very door, will not long
be suspended.

Some miles above Serpa, the Belem entered the black water of the
Rio Negro, which flows on unmixed with the whitish-yellow floods of the
Amazon, for a considerable distance. Though of crystalline transparency,
it looks quite dark brown when seen in volume; the colour, common to
many other rivers of these regions, being caused by decomposed plants,
especially a kind of swimming grass, growing in the dagos (lakes) on both
sides, mm imeredible masses.

The steamer now shaped its course more and more to the north-west,
and left the Amazon to run into the Rio Negro. At its lower course
this is 2,000 metres in breadth, its left margin showing the wavy lines of
low hills, while the whole of the opposite side, consisting of either igapé
or vargem,t is exposed to iInundations.

Now the first houses of Mandos come in sight, and in a few minutes

* Very similar to bay-wood.

+ There are three marked kinds of alluvium in the valley that differ materially
from each other in their vegetation.

1. Zhe Igapo, the last deposit, may be some ten years old, but never rises to more
than five yards above low water; and the vegetation is in proportion to its date. The
Embauba ( Ceeropia) especially thrives on the lowest and most recent Igapdé, while the
Seringa or Caoutchouc-tree (Siphonia elastica) prefers the older one. The Igapé is
inundated already by the ordinary level of the water.

2. The Vargem. As soon as the Igapé has risen by the deposits of the high waters
above the ordinary level of the river, the character of the vegetation changes. ‘The
Cacao, the thorny Murt-murt palm, the slender P4o mulatto, so appreciated as fuel,
appear with some other larger trees, that never are found on the Igapé. There is a
sort of Vargem only inundated by extraordinary high floods, whose vegetation resem-
bles more and more that of the next degree.

8. The Terra Firme, that is nothing else than the former bottom of the sea, into
which the waters have torn their way after a general raising of the ground, or the


FROM RIO DE JANEIRO TO THE RAPIDS OF THE MADEIRA. 39

the Belem, after sheltering us for seven days, is quietly rocking at anchor
in the port of Manios, the capital of the province of Amazon.

The shallow bay on the left shore of the Rio Negro was full of fishing-
boats, from beneath whose roofs of palm-leaves half a score of brown faces
popped out to have a look at the strangers, and of large bateloes (barques),
come from Venezuela, laden brimful with hammocks and piassaba, the
hard fibres of a palm (Leopoldinia Piagaba), used for ropes and brooms.
There were also the two little steamers of the Government, besides one of
the Amazon Company, which was to set out on the morrow, instead of the

Belem, for the frontiers of Pert,—another seven or eight days’ voyage.
As the shallow shore did not admit a direct approach even for small

boats, and as a landing-bridge seemed te be an unheard-of luxury, there

/

sy S
Sw oF . a
RS 5 x
"R y ea
Terra furme ‘y <§ Ss ~ : Terra firme
— 4s ¥ w y y
" FS > /
: ; - =
Middle water 7s my; 4
= tae
= = << Dp
4 4 y
ma .
Goncave shore, y al Connex shore.
=.
We
THE DIFFERENT STAGES OF LAND FORMATION.

was no resource but to disembark in two-wheeled carts, standing up to
the axle-trees in the water, which took both passengers and luggage
safely ashore, though certainly in not what might be called an elegant
way.

The ruins of the little Portuguese fort Sao José da Barra do Rio

bottom of a continental lake, filled by the melted water of icebergs, if we adopt with
Agassiz the hypothesis of an ice period for the Amazon Valley.

A sure vestige of the Terra Firme, besides its greater elevation above the level
of the river, is the yellowish-red clay, and the rich vegetation of its virgin forests.
There the Bertholletia excelsa (Castanheira) spreads its gigantic crown ; and there also
are found most of those precious woods which surpass the best of Europe both in
beauty and in durability.

It may be taken as a rule for the lower course of the affluents of the Amazon, that
whenever there is Vargem on the left concave margin of the river, there will be /gapo
on the opposite convex one; and vice versd at the next curve.

The Zerra Firme is generally at some distance from the shore; but sometimes it
takes the place of the Vargei for a short space.



40: ‘ THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

Negro,* are seen on the left. But they awake much less interest than:
an old Indian cemetery, recently discovered on levelling the ground in
the neighbourhood of the ramparts.. Hundreds of those large urns of red
clay; (Jgagabas ), in which the aborigines used to bury their dead, are seen
there in long rows, and at no great depth im the earth. In many of them
the remains of human bones have been found, whose state of decom-
position showed them to be of very ancient date.

In spite of its pompous title, Capital of the province of Amazonas,
Manaos is but an insignificant little town of about 3,000 inhabitants.
Unpaved and badly-levelled streets, low houses, and cottages of most
primitive construction, without any attempt at architectural beauty, and
numerous Portuguese vendas,—where
anything may be had, from Lisbon
wine and English printed cotton, to
Brazilian cheese and dried piraruct ;
from Paris soaps and pomatums, to
caoutchoue and cacao; from the Bel-
gian fowling-piece to the imported
arrow-head—certainly fail to give an
imposing ensemble ; while the popula-
tion, showing samples of all possible
mixtures of white, negro, and Indian
blood, also reminds us forcibly that

we are in the midst of the South
American continent, in the very
centre of the Amazon Valley, opened so recently to civilisation and
trade. But the magnificent blue sky, a most exuberant vegetation, and
the fresh air of careless geniality in the people, tend to make us forget
tae want of luxuries, and render our first impression of Mandos a very
pleasant one, heightened greatly by its igarapés t—bays or channels
running far into the land, whose banks are covered with the most
luxuriant verdure.

We were lucky enough to find immediately a little house, in which
we installed ourselves as quickly as possible, but im which, unfortunately,

* The first establishment of the Portuguese on the Rio Negro dates from 1668. It
was situated at the mouth of the little affluent Taruma, and was founded by Pedro da
Costa Favella. The fort of Sao José was built a year later by Francisco da Motta

Falcao.
} Igara, canoe; and Pé, road.


HOUSE OF A WEALTHY INDIA-RUBBER COLLECTOR (Lower Maneira).





FROM RIO DE JANEIRO TO THE RAPIDS OF THE MADETRA. 41

we were detamed mueh longer than we had anticipated; for, notwith-
standing the efforts of the President, we were unable to get, either there
or in the vicinity, the required number of rowers for our expedition,
though we offered high wages.

The Indians and Mestizoes of these countries are extremely indolent,
and will work just enough to keep themselves from starvation. The Rio
Negro being full of excellent fish, which sell well and are caught with
very little trouble, and the soil being as fertile as it can possibly be, they
spend the greater part of their time lolling comfortably in their ham-
mocks, in a state of pleasant drowsiness, which they would not exchange
for regular activity for any money. More or less they are all like the
mestizo, who replied to a surveyor, offermg him a high rate for his
services as guide, paddler, hunter, and fisher: ‘ Return to-morrow, after
I have sold my fish in town, and I’ll give you double if you will let
me alone for the future.”

At last we were able to bid good-bye to Manaos, after surmounting
innumerable difficulties, caused chiefly by the incapacity and carelessness
of the Seeretary to the Minister of Public Works at Rio, and the jealousy
of the mighty Amazon Steam Company, who saw a dangerous rival in
some future Madeira Company.

Through the Bolivian consul, Don Ignacio de Arauz, we had made
the acquaintance of an Italian merchant, settled in Bolivia, who was
returning thither, and who, for due compensation, agreed to cede to us
some of his unwieldy boats* with the required number of Mojos and
Canichana Indians. These broad-shouldered sons of the plains of the

* Most of the vessels .on the Amazon have appellations quite different from those
used on the coast. For instance, a schooner with a sort of wooden awning on deck is
called Coberta; a broad sloop with an arched covering of palm-leaves, Batelio; a
smaller half-covered boat for rowing and sailing, Jyarité; while the canoe is called
Montaria, as it takes the place, so to say, of the horse (montaria, from montar a
cavallo). The shape of these vessels, especially of the smaller ones, often recalls the
Chinese junks with their peculiarly formed prows. The details of their construction
are rather curious. The bottom is made of one piece of the elastic wood of the
Jacaréuba (Calophyllum Brasiliense), in Bolivia called Palo Maria. To make a boat of
two or three yards in breadth, a trunk of about one yard in diameter is carefully
hollowed, slowly heated over a coal fire, kept carefully asunder by wooden levers to the
required width, and left so till it is perfectly cooled by frequently pouring water on it.
The boat will not alter from the shape thus given to it. A few ribs, a stern, a prow,
and some benches are put in, a board is nailed all round, and the boat is ready to be
launched and to pass through currents and cataracts. It is true these boats are not
what could be called elegant, but they answer well for the hard work they have to
ufdergo. The price of an igarité of ten tons is about 300 milreis—£40.



42 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

Mamoré and Itonama had struck us already in the streets of Manaos by
their singular clothing: straw hats made by themselves, and long shirts
without sleeves, of the brown bark of the turury-tree; and by their
activity. They were about the only persons we saw working in the
streets, carrying turtles and fuel from the shore to the houses, or lending
a hand at new buildings. They here gain about ten times as much as
they could in their own country, where they live in great misery ; and
so there is an endless current of emigration from Bolivia to Brazil, in
spite of all the reclamations of the former.

After having secured the boats and erew, we had to set about the
difficult task of buying provisions for the long voyage before us,—rather
a severe trial of our patience, on account of the astonishing indolence of
the sparse population, which barely allows it to provide for its own
subsistence. Not only are the black beans, that “ staff of life ” for the
greater part of Brazil, brought from Para, a distance of about three
hundred leagues; but even the mandioca flour is imported from the
Lower Amazon in thousands of baskets, though that mealy root would
thrive just as well in the neighbourhood of Mandos. In respect of meat
it is even worse. Instead of the charque, or carne seca (dried meat) of
the Southern provinces, which is nutritious enough and easily preserved,
they have in the North only an abominable dried fish, the piraruct, that
becomes completely uncatable after a long voyage and in such a moist
atmosphere; and, as the limited space of the boats does not allow of
making a large provision of live turtles, which (so to speak) take the
place of beef in these regions, the traveller must largely rely on his good
luck in hunting and fishing.

We took provisions for about four months, the rest of the baggage
consisting of tools for canoe-making and repairing, ropes, tents, arms,
drugs, and presents for the savage and half-savage tribes in the valleys of
the Madeira and Mamore.

Besides the eighty Indian paddlers, the expedition consisted of my
father and myself; a young Brazilian engineer, Joaquim Manoel da Silva,
our technical assistant ; the Italian merchant from Bolivia ; and a young
Ferman, P. v. 8., whose restless spirit had driven him much about in the
world, and who had before accompanied us on a similar exploration, as
boat’s-mate, carpenter, master of the arms, and assistant of surveys.

Our seven canoes differed greatly in size and freightage. The largest
of them was fifteen tons, and had sixteen rowers; while the smallest


FROM RIO DE JANEIRO TO THE RAPIDS OF THE MADEIRA. 43

montaria had three only, the steersman included. Most of them had a
sort of half-deck, like the igarit¢s, and a solid roof of palm-leaves or raw
lide, to shelter the passengers from the sun and rain.

S

i)

o

“A

- DQ

°

o

: q

S

a

im

MN

ol

r A

a)

~ Py

Bd

al

<“

o

al
-
,*
A
y=
» &
-

The two pilots, one at the rudder, the other with a broad pagaia (a
sort of short hand-rudder used generally on these rivers, with round,
sometimes gaudily painted, tiller) in the hand, stand behind the roof or

tolda, at the end of the deck; the cargo having been carefully piled up



44 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

in the middle, leaving only a small space on each side for the crew,
whose dark faces and tall, well-proportioned frames, set off to advantage
by their tattered shirts of bark, give altogether a strange appearance to
our little flotilla, even to one well-accustomed to the navigation of these
rivers.

The voyage from Mandos to the mouth of the Madeira, and on its
lower course, when done as we did it—paddling slowly against the current
—is, at least, a hard trial of perseverance ; and “ Paciencia,” a favourite
word of the Brazilians, which they use to freshen up their courage with,
was often in our minds.

The landscape has that character of dull monotony peculiar to the
valleys of these gigantic rivers, whose shores consist of alluvium for
hundreds of miles. The banks of the lower Madeira, being generally
igapé (the newest deposit), the vegetation rarely shows the powerful
forms of the virgin-forest; now and then only, the big trunk of a
bombacea is seen behind the slender white stem of the cecropia.

On the tops of the highest trees we saw, for the first time, the
smooth, light green leaves of a widely-known climbing orchid, the
vanilla ; and one of our Indians mounted on the boughs, to get us some
bunches of the long green fruit, which as yet yielded no trace of its
delicate flavour, that ensues on the drying of the fruit.

Very often a broad girdle of swimming grass, Cana-rana (which
means sham or false sugar-cane), separating the land from the open
water, prevented our landing for miles; and we had to go on until,
often late in the evening, a landing-place near one of the few huts on
shore rendered it possible for us to descend and pitch our tents.

The inhabitants of these huts—whose straight black hair, dark skin,
and quiet, reserved behaviour show them clearly to be of Indian race—
live principally on the fish and turtle they catch in the river, while they
can easily buy the few clothes they want, their ammunition and fishing-
hooks, with the produce of a small cacao-plantation near their homes.

Borsa, formerly called Santo Antonio de Araretama, the only village
found on the whole length of the Madeira, is about twenty-five leagues
above its mouth, and was founded, about the middle of the last century,
by the Jesuits as a mission among the Barés and Toras Indians.

The establishment, in its early days, suffered much from the attacks
of the savage Arara tribe. In spite of its pompous title of “ Villa,”
it is only an agglomeration of twelve or fifteen low dirty huts round a


FROM RIO DE JANEIRO TO THE RAPIDS OF THE MADEIRA. 45

half-finished little church. The only white man there, a greedy, am-
bitious priest, is taking advantage of the ignorance of his poor Indian
parishioners in the most shameful manner; and unfortunately he is not
an isolated example.

These Vigarios, and the superior officers of the Guarda Nacional,
must be counted among the greatest drawbacks to the future prosperity
of these districts; for the latter have the privilege of selecting men
for military service in the line; and they generally abuse this right
in the grossest way, leaving unmolested those who will work for them
without wages, and sending away those who show a disposition to resist.

The Brazilian Government is more or less acquainted with this state
of things ; but the Ministers plead the great distance, and take few, if any,
measures against these petty tyrants, on account of the number of votes
they dispose of at the elections of the Deputies for the National Assembly.

Above Borba, which is said to have formerly produced good tobacco,
there are some cacao-plantations, whose fruit at the time of our passing
there (in June) were almost ripe and of a bright yellow colour ; and about
this part of the river also the first high trunks of the caoutchouc-trec
the Siphonia elastica, or Seringa, as it is called here. On the
Amazon and lower Madeira these valuable plants are almost destroyed by

are seen

continuous withdrawal of their milky sap.
The huts of some caoutchouc-gatherers (Seringueiros) are seen now
and then

low roofs of palm-leaves, beneath one end of which there is
a raised floor or framework of lath, one or two yards from the ground,
to which the inhabitants retire at high water, when necessity obliges
them to lead almost an amphibious life.

The next settlement on the right bank of the Madeira is Sapucara-
Ordca, a few huts of the Mura Indians, a tribe despised and pursued by
all others for their thievishness and unsettled, gipsy-like life. Especially
the mighty Munduruet tribe seems to take the task to heart of
annihilating them to the last man.

As thence to Exaltacion on the Mamoré, and to Fort Principe da
Beira on the Guaporé, there is not one settlement to be found of more
than two or three cabins (even at Crato there is but one better house,
and a few low straw huts); and as larger settlements also never existed
before on the Madeira, one cannot but wonder that, on both old and
modern maps, there is a great number of towns and hamlets inscribed in
these wildernesses.



46 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

For instance, the name of Balsamo, marked on them as that of a town,
is quite unknown in these regions, even as the name of a river or
anything else; while Pederneira, likewise proclaimed as a town, is the
name of a current of the Madeira amidst a most desolate wilderness, only
trodden by the wild Caripuna Indians. Far and wide there is no vestige
of any human habitation, no remains of walls, or other signs of bygone
splendour ; nothing but the silent forest and the roaring river bounding
over dark rocks: and yet the maps show the well-known round mark
of a town on this spot, which cannot be mistaken on account of a striking
change of direction of the stream, and of the corresponding longitude
and latitude.

Liven on the lower Madeira, so much more accessible than the regions
of the currents, which are visited only by wild Indians, the five thousand
inhabitants of the valley are so scattered on a surface of more than two
thousand square leagues that we ascended the river often for many
days without seeing any kind of human habitation.

The shores of the Amazon itself are so thinly peopled that the whole
immense province of Amazonas numbers only some forty thousand
inhabitants; while the other great affluents of the right border—the
Xingt, Tapajoz, Puris, Teffé, and Javary—which probably have
analogous soil and productions, are as yet in the undisputed possession
of savages.

Still it is to be wondered at that the population has not increased
on the Lower Madeira, seeing its almost perfect navigability up to Santo
Antonio, and the exuberance of precious timber, fruits, and resins in
its forests.

The Portuguese in the past century had better hopes. They used
the river as a way of communication to the province of Mato Grosso, and
built the fort of Principe da Beira on the Guaporé, to protect their
navigation.

As I mentioned above, the river is almost perfectly navigable below
the broad zone of cataracts and currents, which, beginning at Santo
Antonio, extends as far as Guajara. The few obstructions to free
navigation can be easily removed. At Urod a few rocks blasted would
serve to straighten and deepen the curved channel of 50 feet breadth,
which at low water is less than a yard in depth. At Marmelo and
Abelhas, near Crato, even simpler operations would suffice.

At Crato, a lovely Estancia (farm), the natural pastures (campos)


FROM RIO DE JANEIRO TO THE RAPIDS OF THE MADEIRA. 47

extend to the water’s edge. Their interior as yet is quite unexplored,
but they are probably connected with the plains or prairies of Bolivia.

The cattle of the Estancia, whose first stock had come from Bolivia
(descending the Madeira in barques), are thriving wonderfully, and
will one day become of importance to the population of the Upper
Amazon and Lower Madeira, who, until now, have subsisted chiefly on
fish and turtle.

A few years ago, when the first Bolivian caoutchouc-gatherers settled
near the Madeira, some raw ox-hides they had brought with them were
quite a marvellous sight for their Brazilian neighbours, who used to
touch them and to wonder what great powerful animals oxen must be.

Above Crato there are some ten or twelve Bolivian Seringueiros,
each of them working with twenty or thirty Mojos Indians, who will
make them rich men ina few years. It is true their lives are not very
secure, the wild Indians not being the best of neighbours. Only eight
years ago the house of one of them was attacked by the savage

arentintin Indians, and the poor victims were roasted and eaten by the

cannibals; but as they were surprised on a sandbank at their horrid
meal, and severely punished by their pursuers, they have never again
ventured out of the depths of their forests. Yet no Scringueiro will
dare to penetrate into one of the lateral valleys, be they never so full
of the richest seringaes (caoutchoue forests). Sooner or later they would
have to dread an attack at dawn of day, and their few fire-arms would
be of little avail against the long arrows and heavy lances of the Indians,
who, moreover, would not be the only enemies to be dreaded there; for
the fevers, sesdes (or febres tereianas, as the Brazilians call them), are
just as bad, or worse, than the fierce red sons of the forest.

More than one settlement had to be abandoned on account of their
prevalence, yet they are not so universally spread over the lower levels
of these wide valleys as is generally supposed ; on the contrary, they are
usually restricted to certain localities. At Manos, for instance, there
never was a case of ague, nor in the plains of Bolivia; while it is very
frequent on the Upper Rio Negro and Rio Branco, and in the region of
the rapids of the Madeira. On the Lower Madeira there are only three
places really dangerous, Santo Antonio, Jammary, and Aripuana, though
in November, on arrival of the first high floods from the Beni, a fever-
blast sweeps through the whole valley.

In 1820, and the following years, when the first symptoms of the



48 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

revolution showed themselves that finally separated the colony of Brazil
from the mother-country, Portugal, there was a sort of Portuguese
Cayenne, or Lambessa, called Crato, on the Madeira, which had acquired
a sad celebrity for its fevers. But it was not the Crato of to-day, which,
on the contrary, enjoys an unusually wholesome climate, in consequence
of the extensive grassy plains in its vicmity. That place of exile was
situated about thirty-six leagues higher up, at the mouth of the Jammary,
and it maintains its unhealthy repute to the present day.

The plague gets more and more malignant and frequent as one
approaches the region of the rapids, where a greater elevation and a
rocky soil would lead one to suppose it less dangerous and less regular
in its appearance. It has happened that Bolivian merchants descending
the river have been in danger of losing everything by the sudden illness
of all their crew, and the death of some of them. ‘The rest reached
Santo Antonio, the last rapid, with the greatest difficulty; but thence the
descent can be effected, even with a sick crew, in case of need.

On the extensive plains of Bolivia—between the Beni, Mamoré,
Itonama, and Baurés—which are completely submerged every year, and
where the subsiding floods leave a great number of stagnant pools, whose
water, brown with decomposed organic matter, is used even for drinking,
intermittent fevers, strange to say, are scarcely known. Within the
last year only the first cases appeared at Exaltacion, on the Mamoré ;
and the inexperienced inhabitants thought them some contagious disease
brought from the Amazon or the Madeira.

It is certain that, on the latter at least, the bad drinking-water, and
the muddy floods issuing from the Beni at the beginning of the rainy
season, are the chief causes of the ague; but as some places, like Santo
Antonio, are particularly afflicted by it without any apparent reason,
there must be another agent able to modify existing conditions, at least
to a certain degree ; and that is no doubt found in the quicker or slower
renewal of the atmosphere. This is confirmed by the fact that on many
spots the fevers have become less after the forest has been cleared, or
cut in a certain direction; and this may expla why the miasmata cause
little or no mischief in the swampy plains of the Madeira and Mamoré,
where the fresh breezes play. On the whole, it seems that the fevers are
decreasing on the Madeira.

Among the poorer caoutchouc-collectors Peruvian bark is rarely
found, though it has already come in large hide-covered bags from the


FROM RIO DE JANEIRO TO THE RAPIDS OF THE MADEIRA. 49

Cordillera through the Mamoré and Madeira to the Amazon and Para,

_while formerly it had to be transported over the icy heights of the Andes
to the Pacific. Besides a great many most extravagant houschold drugs,
they use commonly the caferana, a herb of bitter taste found in the
woods, which is said to be as efficacious as Peruvian bark.

On account of the singularity of the fact, I cannot omit to mention
that there is a German among the Seringueiros of the Madeira. He had
come over from Holstein twenty years ago, had enrolled himself as a
soldier, and fought against Rosas in the La Plata States; and he is now
leading a sort of Robinson Crusoe life near the Madeira. He is reported
to be a very fast gatherer, and to prepare, with his Indian wife, during
the three or four dry months, more than a hundred arrobas (one arroba
is equivalent to 82 lb.) of Seringa, while the average produce of a family
is only about fifty arrobas.

It was pleasant to see the joyous surprise and the brightened face of
the man, when he unexpectedly heard our loud salutation, in German, of
“Good morning, countryman!” from out a canoe full of Indians. We
had easily recognised him by his fair hair and beard, the more so, as we
had heard of him before, and had been looking out for him for two days.
He stood near the water’s edge, watching our canoes coming slowly up.
Near him was his female companion, a stout, strongly built Tapuya,* and
behind them some of their offspring, whose yellow hair contrasted
strangely with their dark skins.

A thousand such families, living along the river, soon would
completely change the aspect of the country. specially if an energetic
company, fully alive to the position, and sure of adequate support from
home, would lead the settlers and protect them against the inevitable
jealousies of land and trade monopolists, such a colony might anticipate
full success, particularly as facilities of intercommunication will soon give
a heavy blow to the old system of robbery.

Some of the hundreds of European workmen, necessary for the
construction of the Madeira railway, certainly w2// remain there, in spite
of fevers and difficulties; and it will depend only upon the ability of the

*Jn the Tupi language Tapuyo means foreigner and enemy; but nowadays the
appellation is given not only to all Indian settlers of the Amazon Valley, of whatever
tribe they may be, but, also, promiscuously to all mestizoes; so that very likely, a
hundred years hence any one who has a brown skin and catches fish there will be
designated by the word.

E



50

THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

company and the conduct of the Brazilian Government, whether this
number is increased or diminished.

By-and-bye, the monotony of the vegetation, magnificent as it is, and
of the landscape, whose uniformity is unbroken by mountain or hill,
wearies the eye of the traveller; who, as he paddles slowly up these
immense distances in his unwieldy canoe, sees nothing save the blue
sky, the smooth water, and a dense girdle of evergreen forest. The
appearance of the low-thatched roof of a Seringueiro’s wretched home,
or the sight of some small Pacéva* plantation, whose vivid soft
green contrasts sharply with the gloom of the forest behind, is then
regarded as quite a happy event; and we often wished heartily to
change the easy navigation on this smooth surface for the variety of
troubles and dangers that we knew to await us at the Rapids, and
of which we were soon to have our full share.

A remarkable point below Santo Antonio (the first rapid) is the
Prata DE TamanpuA (shoal of the ant-eater—Myrmecophaga Jubata), a
long, sandy shoal on the right hand. There, and on similar banks,
turtles come in the month of September to lay their eggs, in such
incredible numbers that he who sees these cuirassed armies for the
first time cannot but feel a sensation of horror and disgust. With
wonderful rapidity they dig large holes, one foot and a half deep, into
the soft sand, and are often in such a hurry that the eggs of some
nest, which had been already covered with sand, are disturbed and.
scattered about. These shy animals, that generally dive at the slightest
noise, are deaf and blind to any danger at this season, and are easily
laid on their backs by the fishermen and Seringueiros; hundreds of
whom assemble on these occasions, like birds of prey round dead game,
to prepare the Manteiga de Tartaruga (turtle-butter). The eggs are
dug out and put into the canoes. The thin shells are broken and
crushed by treading on them, and the fat yolks, with which they
are almost filled, become a thick yellow substance. Under the glowing
rays of the tropical sun, the oily parts soon settle on the surface, and

* Pacova, the Tupi name for a species of large plantain, also called Banana da Terra
(that is to say, the aboriginal Banana, to distinguish it from the other species imported,
probably from India). This fruit is quite indispensable to the population of the whole
Amazon basin. It grows there to the enormous height of forty centimetres, and is
eaten both ripe and unripe, raw and cooked. When ripe and dried in the sun it sur-
passes the fig in delicacy of taste, while it is much like our potato when dried unripe and
boiled.



FROM RIO DE JANEIRO TO THE RAPIDS OF THE MADEIRA. 51

are easily skimmed into large earthen jars. The fat thus gained is not
remarkable for delicacy of taste, and is by no means a substitute for
butter and olive oil, as one might suppose from the fresh eggs being
very agreeable to the palate. The decomposition of manifold impurities,
and the circumstance that often some of the eggs have been already
half-hatched by the sun, give it an abominable flavour, recalling to
mind Russia-leather and tanneries, which renders it thoroughly

TURTLE-HUNTING ON THE MADEIRA.

disgusting to a civilised Christian’s palate, at least. Even in the basin
of the Amazon the turtle-butter is used only for lamp-oil, and seldom for
cooking purposes.

As the exuberant Flora of these countries offers more than one
rich oily fruit, yielding excellent material for combustion (the ricinus or

Castor-oil nut, for instance), such a war of extermination against the
turtles, on whose meat the population largely depends for food, is doubly
unreasonable.

It is clear that, with the present procedure, they must rapidly
decrease, and that, at no distant date, they will be counted amongst the
things of the past, as will be seen by the following figures. On the

E2



52 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

Madeira, about 2,000 jars (potes) are annually filled with turtle-butter.
For each jar about 2,000 eggs are required. Thus 4,000,000 eggs, on a
moderate calculation, are destroyed every year. Besides which, three or
four thousand female turtles are caught im the laying-season at the
Praia de Tamandua alone, as every Seringueiro takes a few hundred
away to keep them as live stock; and, finally, as if such a destruction
were not enough, none of the canoes passing there at the right season
will omit the opportunity of searching the shoal for newly-hatched
turtles of five or six centimetres length, which are reckoned great
delicacies; so that comparatively few will come to full growth.

Now, considering that on the Solimdes and its tributaries, the
Purts, Teffé, &c., a similar process is going on, it can be easily
understood why these animals, in spite of their enormous productive-
ness (a turtle lays from one to two hundred eggs), have sensibly
decreased in number within the last five or six years, and that, hence-
forth, they must necessarily decrease in the ratio of geometrical pro-
gression.* A few years ago a good-sized tartaruga of about one metre’s
length, one metre broad, and thirty-six to forty centimetres thick, equal
to the provision of a good dinner for fifteen persons, could casily be
purchased at. Mandos for two milreis, +} whereas nowadays it is very often
not to be had at five.

The tartaruga is hunted, like the other species, even out of the
laying-season, with bow and arrow, called sararaca, especially adapted for
the purpose. The arrow’s iron point is loosely stuck into the shaft, and
fastened to it by a long, thin string of pineapple fibre (caraud), which
unrolls when the wounded animal suddenly dives, bearing away the
inserted weapon. The shaft swimming on the surfave indicates the exact
spot, and is taken up by the fisherman, who thus hauls his prey easily up
by means of the caraua-string. As soon as it appears above water, it is
finished by a blow with a heavy harpoon, and put into the boat, which
not seldom is upset in the efforts of the inmate of the tiny craft to secure
his prize.

* The different species living on the Amazon and its influents are:—1. The
Tartaruga, the largest of all; the male is called Capitary. 2. The Cabeguda (the big-
headed), 3. The Ditid (Emys Pitia). 4. The Tracajé (Emys Tracajé: Spix), consider-
ably smaller than the former. 5. The Maté-maté (Chelys fimbriata: Spix), with two
deep furrows on the back. By far the most important of them for the population is
the Tartaruga.

f One milrci=about three shillings.


FROM RIO DE JANEIRO TO THE RAPIDS OF THE MADEIRA. 53

Above the Praia de Tamandud are scen the first precursors of the
cliffs, which cause the rapids—small islets of rock, and boulders of granite
near their margins, such as we had not scen for all the long months since
we left the sea-coast. Soon chains of hills came in sight on both sides ;
and, after having doubled the next wooded projection of the bank, the
Rapid of Santo Antonio, the first of a long series, lay before us.



CHAPTER II.

THE RAPIDS OF THE MADEIRA AND THE MAMORE.

Santo Antonio.—Theotonio.—
The Caripunas.—The Caldei-
yao do Inferno.—Inscrip-
tions on the Rocks.—The
Salto do Giréo.—Our old
Mulatto’s description of an
Attack.—Forsaken cabins of
the Caripunas.—Ribeirao.—
Other Inscriptions. — The
Beni.—The Mamoré.—Exal-
tacion.—The Return.

°HE yellow floods of the

Madeira rush, roaring
and splashing, at a
furious rate over the
dark rocks in the mid-
dle of the stream, quite
a new and refreshing
sight after the mono-
tonous scenery of its
lower course. Mighty
blocks of a gneissose
metamorphic rock, their
smooth jagged points resembling a wildly waving sea, line continuously
both the shore and the isles.

Opposite a rocky island which divides the river into two unequal
arms, some straw huts are almost entirely concealed by the dense
shrubbery. They are the remains of a Brazilian outpost, abandoned on
account of the fevers; but no trace is left of the Mission, Santo Antonio,
founded in 1737 by the Jesuits, and transposed after a short duration to
Trocano and Ararctama (Borba); the buildings, probably, having been
only light cottages.




Sas SEE

4 THE THEOTONIO FALL, ON THE MADEIRA.

ote

(700 METRES FROM SHOkE TO SHORE, 10 METRES HEIGHT OF CATARACT.)


THE RAPIDS OF THE MADEIRA AND THE MAMORE. 58

The difference of declivity between the smooths above and below,
on an average level, is 4:13 English feet; the division in the left
channel is at 164 feet, that on the right about six times that distance.
Here the canoes must be unladen, and their contents carried to a point
on the left bank above the rapid, while the empty vessels are towed there
through a labyrinth of intricate channels, amidst large granite blocks,
close to the edge of the right bank.

Over a large shoal and some flat islands, we could see already from
Macacos, the next not very considerable rapid, the rising water-spray of
the mighty fall of Tuzoronio. Between low hills running down to the
water’s edge on both sides, the river has hollowed a course of 2,300 feet
in breadth, through which it dashes at furious speed, terminating in a
majestic fall 36 feet high.

Not only the cargo, but the canoes themselves, had to be transported
hence on land for more than 760 yards to the quiet water above the
fall, a heavy task which took us three complete days of hard labour, our
Mojos working with right good will, although the passage of the boats
was facilitated by cylinders being placed under them. No wonder, by
the way, that one or the other of the canoes, after encountering so rough
a transport, was so damaged as to require immediate repair, caulking, and
even the addition of new ribs.

On the ridge of a rocky hill on the right bank, we saw the remains of
some walls, covered almost completely by shrubs, low palms, and thorny
torch-thistles. They date from 1753, when Theotonio Gusmao, by the
direction of the Portuguese Government, here founded, in a very good
position for defence, a military post, which was, however, soon abandoned.
At that time the commerce with the province of Mato Grosso having
aequired a fresh impulse from the erection of the Forto do Principe da
Beira on the Guaporé, an impulse strengthened by the explorations in
1767 and 1780, such Destacamentos (or military posts) were of the first
necessity on that water road, as well for securing the supply of provisions,
and for the protection thus gained against the wild Indians, as for the
assistance rendered by the soldiers in the hard work near the rapids.

The material of the hills we found to be the same, more or less, over
the whole region of the rapids; gneiss, with mostly a very pronounced
stratification, and always the same run. We examined it more closely,
expecting to find, according to the theory of Agassiz, numerous erratic
boulders of different composition lying on the regularly formed rock.



56 . THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

But neither there, nor higher up in Bolivia, could we discover any trace
of these “foundlings,” even as Agassiz himself was unable to discover, in
the environs of Rio de Janeiro, the “roches striées”” and “‘roches moutonnées”
of Switzerland, which testify to an ice-period with its immense glaciers.

~ Agassiz attributes their absence to the rapid crumbling of the rocks
under the combined influence of the tropical sun and rain; but he seems
to overlook the fact that they diminish much faster in moderate climates,
by the severe disintegrating operation of freezing water penetrating into
the smallest crevices.*

While employed as engineer on a road} in the province of Minas
Geraes, I had occasion to examine numerous specimens of the spheroidic
boulders of diorite, with their concentric coatings of red clay, pronounced
to be ‘“foundlings” by Agassiz. To me these shell-shaped crusts
appeared. to be rather the effect of the cooling process, the more so as the
ferruginous clay always was of a more intense hue, like that of burnt
ochre, nearest the diorite ball.

Seen from the foot of the projecting hill crowned with the remains of
the Destacamento, the many breaks of the Turoronro CaTaractr, indeed,
offer a grand spectacle. It extends across the whole river (760 yards),
and has, in general, an angle of 45°. In the middle of it emerges a
rocky cone, whose dark colour contrasts sharply with the dazzling white
foam and spray. Close to the right bank, where the bulk of the water is
discharged, the waves rise to a height of 33 feet, and we there saw the
gigantic trunk of a drifting forest-tree tossed and whirled about as if it
were a light reed.

From Santo Antonio to above Theotonio there is no great interval
between the banks, there being an almost uninterrupted succession of
hills from 26 to 40 feet high, densely wooded, as the country generally
is, though the vegetation is not so rich and luxuriant as we had found it
below Santo Antonio.

The next rapid is Morrmnos (little hill), where we had to empty the

* In Rio de Janeiro and other Brazilian towns thero are a greatmany cupolas of
churches, terraces, vases, and architectural ornaments of every kind, covered only with
common mortar, which have successfully resisted the sun and rain of a century or more ;
whereas, in our own “moderate” climate, they would not last three years.

¢ This was constructed by the Company Unido é Industria (President, Marianno
Procopio Ferreira Lage; Engineers, Joseph Keller and Bulthos); the first and most
extensive road in Brazil (it is 90 miles long). The difficulties of surmounting the water-
sheds were considerable. The iron girder bridge, 502 feet long, over the Parahyba, near
Tres-Barras, after the plans of Joseph Keller, is a remarkable piece of work.


THE RAPIDS OF THE MADEIRA AND THE MAMORE. 57

boats again and tow them along against the strong current. Above it the
river is between 1,300 and 1,550 yards broad, and is completely navi-
gable for 334 miles, that is, to the next considerable rapid, which bears
the ominous name of CatpErrio po Iyrerno (kettle of hell).

ONE OF THE SMALLER RAPIDS OF THE CALDEIRAO DO INFERNO.

A horde of Caripuna Indians have settled in the neighbourhood. We
paid them a visit in their carefully roofed palm-leaf sheds, though we
knew they did not enjoy the fairest reputation for peaceableness, having
been: engaged in several bloody conflicts with the white-frces.



58 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

Whether it was that our numbers imposed on them, or whether in
consequence of the little presents we offered them, certain it is that they
received us very well, and allowed us at our leisure to examine their
arms and implements. We obtained from them some bows made of the
heavy wood of the pachiuba palm, long arrows of reed, and several pretty
feather ornaments, in exchange for knives, scissors, and white glass beads.

Our Mojos displayed a curious mixture of fear and contemptuous
disgust at sight of these naked savage relations of theirs. They
reminded me involuntarily of the shepherd’s dog and the wolf.

If it were possible, in the next score of years, to make these
Caripuna Indians tolerably peaceable neighbours of the white man, the
first beginning of colonisation on the Upper Madeira would be made,
If they could not be drilled into workmen wielding shovel and axe on
yoads or railways, they still might be very useful in planting mandioe,
Indian corn, and sugar-cane, or as hunters and fishermen. Unfortunately,
no steps have been taken as yet to this end. Such things usually
remain vain wishes in Brazil, notwithstanding the good-will of some
clear-sighted statesmen; and even in this event, the poor autochthons
will have to succumb in the conflict with the white race. The par-
ticulars of our encounter with the Caripunas will be found in an
ensuing chapter.

The Canprerrio po Inrerno, the next cachoeira or rapid above the
Caripuna sheds, is one of the worst of the whole range, not so much
on account of its height as of the trouble and dangers of its passage.
By seven considerable islands the river is here divided into as many
arms, at the entrance to which is the principal fall, or the Caldeirao, the
total slope of which is of 194 feet in an interval of more than 3,280
feet. Here again the weary task of unloading had to be done,
trying even to our patient, broad-shouldered Mojos Indians. Bags and
chests are heaved and dragged over the sharp edges of stones and
rocks, and the vessels are towed up through narrow, tortuous channels,
sometimes at the imminent risk of those concerned.. Happy indeed
is he who leaves that “kettle” safely behind him.

On one of these islands, with the aid of a lantern, I discovered,
when preparing to take astronomical observations, some flatly incised
designs, some of them spiral lines and others semicircular, on the
dark-brown polished surface of several nearly vertically posed slabs of
ruck, the largest of which was more than 64 fect in height, with a


THE RAPIDS OF THE MADEIRA AND THE MAMORE. 59

breadth and thickness of 5 fect. The figures, three quarters to one and a
quarter inches high, were incised only one-sixth of an inch deep. Our
curiosity being awakened by this discovery, we found afterwards the
even more remarkable inscription near the great fall of Riserrio, which
I copied exactly, as well as one of the Caldeirao and one of Lages
farther up. And here a reflection I had before made at the dangerous
passage of the Caldeirao Falls again proved true, viz., that there is no
following implicitly either the counsels of other travellers, or even
one’s self-acquired experience in former expeditions, as to the best
water-way for the boats, which is so easily changed by the slightest
variation of level. At all events, it is necessary that the canoes should
stop upon approaching a rapid, and a clear view of the channels and
of the cliffs to be avoided should be obtained from the shore as near
as possible to the obstruction itself. This often is difficult enough;
and in the last deciding moment, especially in the descent, the fate
of both boat and erew depends chiefly on the quick eye and the strong
arm of her pilot.

The Caldeirao do Inferno has, as I mentioned before, the worst
reputation among the falls of the Madeira; indeed, more than one
richly laden canoe has been dashed to pieces against its black rocks,
and many lives have been lost there. The chance solution of a
geographical problem found its tragic conclusion, at this ill-famed fall,
im the death of the discoverer. Eight or ten years ago, a Peruvian
of the name of Maldonado embarked on the Madre de Dios to escape
the persecutions of his political adversaries, and by this river had
reached the Beni and the Madeira, thus dispelling all doubt as to
the course of the Madre de Dios, which for a long time had been taken
to be one of the tributaries of the Purds.

Maldonado took his hazardous flight on one of those singular little
crafts called Balsas, composed of bundles of a sort of reed, as they are
used on Lake Titicaca. As it was in the most wretched condition
when he entered the Madeira, he obtained by barter from the Caripuna
Indians whom he found there one of their light canoes, in which he
continued his descent. Having passed without accident totally unknown
regions, inhabited only by savages and wild beasts, he had reached the
comparatively safer regions of the Madeira, when his fragile vessel was
hurled against the rocks of the Caldeirio do Inferno, and the hardy
navigator was submerged in the roaring cataract.



60 i THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

Ilis two companions contrived to save their lives, and to escape
starvation on one of the islands, until a descending Bolivian boat took
them up and brought them to Mandos. But as they were uncducated
mestizoes, who could give but an imperfect account of this remarkable
voyage, and as Maldonado’s diary was lost with him, the only scientific
result was the certainty that the Madre de Dios is an affluent, not
of the Purts, but of the Beni, and consequently of the Madeira.

Above the Caldeirio, on the right bank, is a row of hills of about
180 to 200 fect in height, extending to the South-east in an unbroken
line as far as the eye can reach. It. is doubtless a branch of the Serra
da Paca Nova, whose principal chain we were to see farther up, and
whose eastern division forms, under sundry local names, the chief water-
shed between the tributaries of the Amazon and of the Paraguay.

Below the next fall, the Satro po Grrao, the canoes were again
unladen on a favourably situated spot, and, together with the cargo, were
conveyed for nearly 1,000- yards on land, through a dense virgin-forest
whose undergrowth consists partly of cacao-bushes. The total slope of
26 feet is concentrated on four points, while the width of the river,
though very unequal on account of the jagged rocky banks, may be
generally estimated at 760 yards. Gigantic drifted trunks lying on
the tops of the rocky cones, or suspended amid the branches of the trees
on shore, showed the height of the floods in the rainy season; while
the dark-brown rocks partly covered by white lichens, the foaming
water rushing through narrow channels, and a profusion of light
graceful palms, with curiously leaved creepers depending from them
and enveloping them in a dense green veil, which only now and again
permits a glimpse into the dark interior of the forest, combined to
impart ‘to the scenery a charm which was only heightened by the
reflection that no human hand had ever disturbed its primeval luxuriance.

At the upper end of the fall, an old mulatto, who accompanied
the expedition as hunter, showed us the spot where eight years ago
he and his comrades had been attacked by the Caripunas. He
related that they had a cargo of salt* for Mato Grosso and were

* While in the sea-ports a bag of salt of about 60 Ib. fetches two or three milreis,
it is worth fifteen to eighteen in the cattle-breeding districts of the interior, some
150 to 200 leagues from the Atlantic; and, especially before the regular steam
navigation on the River Plate and the Paraguay, it was well worth while transporting
it there, even in small canoes and over the rapids of the Madcira.


1
‘Y

TWN

get.

THE RAPIDS OF THE MADEIRA AND THE MAMORE, 61

busily engaged in. dragging their boat over the rocks, when the
treacherous Indians, who had lent them a helping hand, turned upon
them.

“ Here,” said he, “our salt-bags were piled up; and here, from
out this shrubbery, the chieftain came with at least fifty of his tribe,
armed every one of them with bows and arrows. He professed to

FAN-LEAF OF A PALM.

be dissatisfied with the stipulated remuncration—knives and glass beads
that had been handed over to him—and asked for more.

“One of our party, who, understanding a little of their language,
acted as interpreter for us, tried. to pacify him, and offered him a
piece of the succulent tapir roasting hard by at the spit, but he
refused it disdainfully ; and at this moment, while our companion
was yet speaking to the chieftain, he was pierced by an arrow shot



62 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

at a few paces from behind, which left him just strength enough to
shout to us to open fire.

“Discharging our eight guns (we mustered no more), we wounded
several of the Indians, the rest of whom retired to the protection of
the nearest big trunks, and thence sent a perfect volley of arrows;
which, however, wounded but two of our crew, as we had taken shelter
behind our salt-bags. But for this bulwark we should have been
destroyed, every one of us. When the Caripunas saw that more than
one of them would be killed if they tried to take our strong position
by assault,—and Indians rarely attack unless sure of success, with
only small loss,—they gave in, and slowly retreated into the forest,
carefully screening themselves behind the trees; and we saw no
more of them. But our poor comrade was dead, despite all our
efforts to recall him to life; and we had to bury him here in the
wilderness.”

Thus spoke the old mulatto. His tale bore the impress of truth
so strongly that, though reluctantly, I was forced to modify the good
opinion I had conceived of the Caripunas on the occasion of our visit
to their shed.

Again our whole crew had to work hard for two days to get the
heavy barques to the smooth water above the Girao.

Even with the cylinders placed underneath, the rolling is not easily
effected over such an uneven rocky soil; but, as the wood is freshly
eut and the sappy bark crushed by the weight of the boats, the
rollers soon get smooth and slippery, and the canoes glide over them
with tolerable rapidity.

The temperature then was extraordinarily low, having sunk on the
31st of July (in the dawn, between four and five o’clock a.m.), to 60°
Fahrenheit—a temperature of rather disagrecable freshness to our skins,
accustomed so long to a tropical heat of 80° and 90°.

At the next rapid of Tres-Irmaos (the three brothers), whose name
is derived from a hill with a three-headed summit, the. Madeira, broken
by a large island into two main arms, with a sharp bend suddenly
alters its principal direction from South-west to North-east, and runs
due East along the parallel of 9° 33”.

A porous ferruginous sandstone, called Pedra Canga, which we had
remarked at Mandos, and which is found in the whole Amazon Valley,
now reappears on the surface. ‘The banks are raised somewhat above


THE RAPIDS OF THE MADEIRA AND THE MAMORE. 63

the highest flood-level; while the hills, seen at a little distance to the
left, attain a height of 330 feet above the base.

The right bank is comparatively flatter; yet here and there are
visible the tops of distant hills.

The next rapid, Do Parxpio, is caused by a cliff of coarse-grained
granite projecting into the river for more than 330 fect. On its
uttermost extremity are some blocks of the same material, bordering a
deeply-worn channel, whose smooth vertical walls have given it the name
of Paredio—that is, supporting wall. The slope is of nearly 64 feet.

Of about the same height is the next rapid of Pederneira (flintstone),
where veins of quartz appear on the surface, and the whole course of
the stream is strewn with isolated blocks of various size. At both
these rapids the cargo only need be transported on land, the canoes
being tracked in the river.

Above Pederneira the Madeira is perfectly free of obstructions.
Following its former course from South-west to North-east, up to the
mouth of the Abuna, it forms at Pederneira a sharp bend almost
rectangular in its deviation.

From time to time, wavy, and in some parts perfectly horizontal
strata of a ferruginous slaty sediment resembling sandstone appear
on the banks, which rise to a height of between 50 and 60 feet
above low-water level. The chain of hills on the left side, which at
Pederneira came close to the water’s edge, now disappears from view ;
and, as far as the eye can reach, extend densely wooded plains, never
visited by the white man. The breadth of the river here is nearly
1,100 yards, while the depth averages from 16 to 20 feet, and the
declivity is less than 1:30,000; so that, for nearly 87 miles, the river
is navigable by the largest vessels and steamers.

The point farthest west of the Madcira River we found to be
3,280 yards above the mouth of the Abuna influent, which has hitherto
enjoyed that designation. Here the river again changes its direction,
describing from Arfras, the next rapid, a great curve to the Abuna,
and thus forming a sort of peninsula between this point and Paredio,

A second horde of Caripunas have chosen this spot for their settle-
ment, evidently for the same reason that induced their relations to
build their sheds on the smooth below the Caldeirio do Inferno—the
stream, which is free of obstruction, affording them easy communication,
and thus facilitating their hunting and fishing excursions. Some old



64 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

bark-canoes revealed to us the beginning of a narrow path, which leads
through the dense forest to their cabins. Hoping to sce again some of
our old friends, for whom we selected some presents, six of us landed
and followed the track, which was
kept scrupulously clean and led
directly inland. At some hundred
paces from the shore, we found an
abandoned shed similar in con-
struction to those we had seen at
the Caldeirio. The luxuriance of
vegetable growth in its interior
showed that it had been deserted
by its inmates for some time; and
we went on, hoping still to find
some of the inhabited huts, to
which the path evidently led. The
vegetation around us was mag-
nificent. Certainly I have never
seen a greater variety of palms
than there was on the borders of
this lonely Indian path. The
umbrella formed by the colossal
leaves of the Uauassi-palm, by
the neat bifurcated fans of a
smaller kind of palm, and by the

THE RAPID OF RIBEIRAO, SEEN FROM ABOVE.

large plantain-like leaves of the
Urania or Pacova Sorordéca, was
so umbrageous, that we expe-
rienced not the slightest incon-
venience from the scorching rays
of the sun.

We walked some four or five
miles without finding the least
indication of a Malocca* being in the vicinity; so we were obliged,
at last, to give up the attempt, and went back to our canoes rather

out of sorts with our bad luck.

* Malocca: Indian settlement.



THE RAPIDS OF THE MADEIRA AND THE MAMORE. 65

The next rapid of Arfras has an inconsiderable declivity (3 feet
4 in.), and can be passed by full canoes towed up the river. This,
though far less troublesome than earrying the load over stocks and
stones, is more dangerous, and requires rather more attention than
will be thought necessary at first sight.. As the unwieldy boats,
when held only by one long rope, are apt to drift transversely against
some rock, smaller cords are attached fore and aft, to regulate the
position of the vessel from the shore, in case of need. The greater
part of the-crew are up-stream, holding the great cable; and each
one has to look out for himself, as the boat comes up, how best he
can get from rock to rock, either jumping or swimming; while others
stand on either side with the smaller ropes, at one or other of which
they pull on word of command, Others stand breast-high in the
roaring, hissing foam of the rapid, trying to keep the bow of the
fragile craft off the glistening black rocks of gneiss, which would
violently open up all its ill-eaulked seams. It is perfectly astonishing

‘to witness the ease with which these Indians secure their footing on

the slippery, wave-washed stones, carry heavy ropes through the cur-
rents, or, if necessary, ascertain by diving whether the boat has
grounded, and how best to get her afloat again. The little rapid
of Prrrqurros is passed in the same way as that of Ardras; not so,
however, the great Cacuorrra po Rrpetrio. ‘The river-bed there is,
for almost four miles, so obstructed by rocky islands and reefs, and
the declivity is so great, that it forms an almost . uninterrupted
succession of roaring falls and rapids. The breadth of the river,
too, has increased, especially at the upper end of the rapid, where
is the principal break (to 2,190 yards); and it embraces several larger
islands.

Flat rocky hills extend to nearly the water’s edge on both sides;
and dense virgin forest covers not only the shores but also the larger
isles.

While the Indians were working hard at drawing the boats over
the last of the rapids, I had taken the meridional altitude of the
sun, and found, in climbing over the rocks of the right shore, another
“written rock,” covered with spiral lines and concentric rings, evenly
carved in the black gneiss-like material, and similar to those of the
Caldeirao. Looking about for more, I discovered a perfect inscription,
whose straight orderly lines can hardly be thought the result of lazy

i



66 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

Indians’ “ Hours of Idlencss.” These characters were incised on a very
hard smooth block of 3 feet 4 inches in length, and of 31 feet in
height and breadth. It lay at an angle of 45°, only 8 feet above
low water, and close to the water’s edge of the second smaller rapid,
the Cacnorira po Rresrrio.. The transverse section of the characters
is not very deep, and their surface is as worn as that of the inscription
found farther down. In some places they are almost effaced by time,

CARVED FIGURES ON THE ROCKS OF THE MADEIRA.

and are to be seen distinctly only with a favourable light. A dark
brown coat of glaze, found everywhere on the surface of the stones
laved at times by the water, covers the block so uniformly, as well on
the concave glyphs as on the parts untouched by instrument, that many
ages must have lapsed since some patient Indian spent long hours in
cutting them out with his quartz chisel. As the lines of the inscription
run almost perfectly horizontally, and as the figures near the Caldeirao


THE RAPIDS OF THE MADEIRA AND THE MAMORE. 67

and the Cachoeira das Lages are so little above low-water mark, the
present position of the block seems to have been the original one.
Unfortunately our knowledge of the history of the South-American-
Indian races, before the Conquest, is so limited (except, perhaps,
some half-mythical traditions respecting the empire of the Incas) that
even the most important periods of this history, the wanderings of
the Tupis, for instance, bear the character rather of clever hypo-
theses than of historical facts. We know of great conquering’ ex-
peditions of the Incas. Can it be that the inscriptions in the Madeira
Valley are connected with them; or are they older even than that ?
Researches and comparative studies of Peruvian antiquities can, alone,
best explain whether the origin of these hieroglyphs is to be sought
in their empire, that land of a long departed civilisation and grandeur.
They could hardly be the work of the forefathers of the Caripunas, if
they were, as we may well assume, on the same low level of civilisation
as their descendants. A rude nation of hunters is not likely to spend
months on the troublesome task of engraving figures on hard rocks
with imperfect flint implements. If they, however, took such a fancy,
their weak and narrow minds would have chosen rather to delineate what
struck them most of all the objects around them; the sun, or the moon,
or the animals they hunted ; or the alligators, turtles and fishes, which
Humboldt found inscribed on the rocks of the Valley of the Orinoco. On
the rocky shores of the Araguaya, that huge tributary of the Tocantins,
there are similar rude outlines of animals near a rapid called Martirios,
from the first Portuguese explorers faneying they recognised the
instruments of the Passion in the clumsy representation.*

In passing the long rapid of Riperrio, we had again to unload
everything, even before we reached the real fall at the upper end.

Of the misery and annoyance of such repeated unloading and carrying
of heavy chests over glowing, bare rocks, under the burning rays of the
sun, against which the stunted growth on the stony soil offers no shelter
worth mentioning to the poor Indians, only he can form an idea who has

* Unfortunately M. Vallée, who, commissioned by the Brazilian Government,
descended the Araguaya a few years ago, does not give even a description of these
figures in his official report, which is equally deficient in all other respects. Of the
hydrographic results of this voyage my colleagues will form an idea if I tell them that
M. Vallée, having made neither levellings nor astronomical observations, simply copied
an old inexact little map of the Araguaya on a considerably larger scale, and offered
it to the Minister on his return.

B2

a



68 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

seen this kind of ‘navigation’ with his own eyes. Notwithstanding
all this, packages of from 500 to 600 Ib. are sometimes transported to
Bolivia in the same covers in which they came from Pard; and I was
told that even pianos have been thus conveyed, and—wonderful to relate
—have arrived entire at Santa Cruz de la Sierra.

Great as are these difficulties, they are as nothing compared with
those of a transport over the Cordillera, with its Soroche,* its bone-
penetrating cold, and its paths leading along precipices which only sure-
footed mules can safely pass; not to speak of the vexatious mounting,
descending and remounting again, of passes that are nearly 15,000 feet
above the level of the sea.

This easily explains the number of Bolivian barques, some sixty or
seventy, which annually descend the Madeira with hides and tallow, and
take back the products of European and North American industry. The
merchants evidently are willing to incur rather the risks and dangers of
the rapids than the difficulties and expenses of the Serra.

The narrow forest-path at Ribeirao, along which we had to carry
our cargo for more than 1,000 yards, and to the preservation and
clearing of which every passing caravan contributes, showed a magnificent
vegetation. Lofty torch-thistles, dense cacao-bushes, sappy uranias,
strelitzias with large banana-like leaves, and a graceful, slender palm
with bifurcated fans, tower in fanciful clusters above the thorny creepers,
which form part of the tangled underwood, and through which you can
penetrate only with knife and hatchet in hand.

A little influent on the right margin, of 15 or 20 feet breadth, at
whose mouth our boats were dragged ashore, to begin their trip on the
dry, has given its name of Ribeirao (rivulet) to the whole rapid.

Just above its mouth a rocky ridge, clad with pulpy cactacee, extends
close to the water’s edge; and its prolongation through the whole river-
bed (2,000 yards) can easily be followed by the line of the fall and a
row of rocky little islets. The fall has a height of 13 feet, and its
whole aspect is quite a peeuliar and picturesque one. We there found
again the round holes in the rocks, called Caldeiroes, or kettles, by the
Brazilians, which we had already noticed on the Parahyba, in the pro-

* Soroche they call, in Bolivia and Pert, the extremely annoying sensation of
giddiness, combined with nausea and painful bréathing, caused by the extreme rarity
of the atmosphere on the Cordillera.


THE RAPIDS OF THE MADEIRA AND THE MAMORE. 69

vince of Sio Paulo, and on the Ivahy and Tibagy,* in the province of
Parana. ‘They are the effects of the loose stones set rolling by the
floods in the natural hollows of the cliffs. These pebbles, which are of
different sizes, bore into the gneiss-like stone (of metamorphic origin)
rows of deep cylindric holes, with smoothly-polished vertical sides, and
of all dimensions, from a few inches width, to 17 or 20 feet in
diameter and depth.

Whole banks of the hard material have been broken off in this way,
as may be distinctly seen by the semicircular incisions of the remaining
parts. In other places the process is still visibly gomg on. A narrow
division is left, at first, between the holes, whose sides are gradually
perforated at the bottom; and this operation continues until the torrent-
propelled stones work the channel deeper and deeper, and finally break
off its outer wall. The whole fall must recede in this way, though
much less rapidly by this simple erosion than by undermining and break-
ing off the upper layers, as does the Niagara, which, it has been ealcu-
lated, recedes at the rate of one foot per annum.

Supposing now that these holes deepen only one fiftieth of an inch
every year—which must be thought rather a high estimate, considering
the great hardness of the structure and the circumstance that most of
the kettles are ‘“ worked”? only during the three months of the floods,
—it will be seen that 12,000 years are required to make a hole 20 fect
deep; and this will be the scale of retrogression of the fall.

As at the Ribeirao, the length of the rock-islands, whose upper end is
now near the edge of the fall, probably represents the original breadth
of the cliff over which the river rushed; and, as this length is of 3,280
feet, two millions of years must have elapsed since the present state
of slow transformation has begun. Though such a caleulation cannot
make any pretension to be regarded as exact, the data being insuf-
ficient, still it gives us an idea of the powerful changes wrought in
nature during immense lapses of time, by the smallest means, even a
pebble set in motion by the water.t

* At the Tibagy, a tributary of the Paranapanema and Parana, these “ kettles”
are anxiously searched by the diamond-washers; as the precious stone, which indeed
is a better “borer” than any other, is often found among the pebbles at the bottom.
The material there is a metamorphic sandstone, while close to it doleritic cones raise
their rocky crowns. ‘ ;

+ In a very interesting work which appeared lately, ‘‘New Tracks in North
America,” by W. Bell, the author gives a detailed description of the gigantic ravines or



70 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

Two and a half miles above Ribeirao is the strait known under the
name of CorrENTEZzA DA Misrricorva ; the total width of the river being
narrowed here to 382 yards. As the steep, rocky shores do not allow
of an extension of the floods on either side, and as the whole enormous
mass of water must pass through the narrow, and not very deep, opening,
the water is necessarily volumed here, and its rapidity is considerably
increased.

Thus, while the height of the falls is generally less at high water,
it increases in the same proportion in the straits, where the overflow
is checked by the limiting ridges.

As there is, besides, a sharp bend in the river, rendering the tracking
from the shore extremely difficult, the Correnteza da Misericordia must,
indeed, at certain times, be an anxious spot for the Bolivian barques.
When we passed there, on the 15th of August, the river was low, and
we experienced no difficulty in coming up against the current. Above
Misericordia the Madeira again reaches its normal breadth of 760 to 880
yards, and is as smooth as a lake up to the Cachoeira da Madeira.
Just below this it widens to almost 2,200 yards, and is divided by
two isles into three main channels.

The Cachoeira, or rapid, itself, is a chaos of small flat islets and
reefs, between which the water rushes with a total declivity of 9 feet
10 inches. We were again compelled to unload here, and to carry the
cargo on land till above the rapid. |

On the metamorphic rocks of the shore we found concentric circles,
like those at the Caldeirao: but the most striking feature of the
Cachoeira da Madeira is the enormous quantity of drift-wood deposited
on the rocks of the left shore, directly below the mouth of the Beni.

Huge trunks of the cedar, and other giants of the forest, swept
down by the floods of the Beni, and driven by currents and eddies
amongst the rocks, have stranded there with the fall of the river;
and there they will remain until, perhaps, next year’s flood may
carry them away down-stream. These entangled masses of many
hundreds of colossal trunks have doubtless induced the Portuguese to
give the name of Madeira (timber, wood) to this rapid; and the enormous

canons of the Colorado and its affluents, where the effects of erosion are striking
indeed. The Colorado has hollowed for itself, out of very hard stone, a bed, the
vertical walls of which reach the enormous height of 5,000 feet in several places;
once even 7,000 feet. The ravine extends for more than 500 English miles.


THE RAPIDS OF THE MADEIRA AND THE MAMORE. 71

quantities of floating timber at the mouth of the river must also have
served to change its old Indian name of Caiary into Madeira.*

The Beni, whose mouth is above the fall on the left hand, has a width
of 1,100 yards, and an average depth of 8 fathoms. As it discharges a
volume of 153,386 cubic feet per second, at its ordinary level (being
something more than the united volume of the Mamoré and Guaporé), the
Beni ought to be considered as the main stream of the Madeira, and the
two others as its tributaries; and, consequently, the name of Madeira
ought to be given to the river only from below the mouth of the Beni,
while above it the name of Mamoré, as that of the larger of the two,
ought to be bestowed; not of Guaporé or Itenez, as is generally done in
Bolivia.t

The mouth of the Beni, which we found to be on the 10° 20' of
Southern latitude, and on the 22° 12’ 20” of longitude West from
Rio de Janeiro, was designated in the last regulation of boundaries
between Bolivia and Brazil as the point where the frontier, running
due West between the Madeira and Javary, touches the shore of the
former. Consequently the left shore of the Madeira, or Mamoré, is
Bolivian territory upwards from the mouth of the Beni, while the right
belongs to the Brazilian province of Mato Grosso, far up to the Guaporé.
At the time of our sojourn in Bolivia, the patriotic party of the so-called
Republic, adverse to Brazil, was highly indignant at this treaty, at the
evident victory of Brazilian diplomacy, or, as many said, of Brazilian gold
over their always money-wanting and greedy Dictator, Melgarejo. But
since this, as well as many other things besides, continued the same after
his expulsion and subsequent death, we must suppose that the hot spirits
have cooled down again, or that the construction of the Madeira Railroad,
the increasing trade of both countries, and the prosperity of the Bolivian
provinces East of the Andes, clearly resulting therefrom, are thought a
sufficient equivalent.

* The isle of Madeira, now totally denuded of its forests, also owes its name to its
abundance in timber ; which must have seemed extraordinary to the Portuguese, whose
country was already stripped of woods at the time of their discovering the isle.

+ These differences in the nomenclature are, on the whole, of little importance, as
in these desert, out-of-the-way countries, they mostly depend on the caprices of the
travellers and geographers; but it does seem incomprehensible that, a few years ago,
maps should have been edited, like the Carte Générale de ’Amérique du Sud, par Brué,
on which the Mamoré is marked as a tributary of the Beni; as if such crude errors had
not been corrected long before, by the explorations of the Portuguese in the eighteenth
century. | si



THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

~T
ko

Very precise instructions, and the advanced season, did not allow us
either on the ascent or on the descent to mount the Beni for any
considerable distance. A minute exploration of this powerful and, as
yet, totally unknown stream would be of the greater interest, in that
the soil on its shores must be of excellent quality, judging from the
size of the drifting trunks of cedar, which grows to such perfection only
ou very rich earth. Besides which, it would be the very best way,
under existing circumstances at least, to bring the Peruvian bark, which
is gathered near its sources, to the Madeira and Amazon. The reduced
quantity of water above the mouth of the Beni (about half) is denoted
less by the bed’s narrowed width than by the river’s decreasing depth.

The next rapid, the Cacnorrra pas Lacxs (that is, of the slabs of
rock), though dangerous at high water, did not oppose to us any serious
obstacle, the river haying been low when we passed it, in the middle of
August.

The prospect was charming; the broad stream being broken up into
pays by several small islands, densely clad with rich virgin forest, over
which slender palms were waving their graceful leaflets.

On the gigantic slabs of the left shore we came up with more of the
buzzling incised figures; but they are so obliterated by time and water
that I had some difficulty in copying them.

Low hills greeting the river on the right proclaimed the vicinity of
the Serra pa Paca Nova, a wooded chain whose extension forms the
chief water-shed between the basin of the Amazon and that of the
La Plata, and whose steep, projecting buttress we sighted presently,
above the next rapid, the CacHorrra po Pao Granpzr. To pass this
fall, whose declivity is of 65 feet at the river’s mid height, was casy
work compared with the fatigues of the CacHoEIRA DAS Bananeinas, the
last great fall of the Madeira. As we had to ayoid the deep channel,
on account of its breakers and powerful currents, and as the large bed
is broken into an infinity of small, shallow arms, we had immense trouble
even in getting the barques near the real fall, where we had to unload.
After four hours’ hard labour, we advanced no more than 220 yards.
At several points the boats had to be partly unleaded, one of the smaller
canoes serving for lighter, and carrying, by several trips to and fro, the
cargo of the heavier barques, till we had got beyond the obstruction.
At last we reached the principal fall of Bananyrras, which has a height
of 20 feet, and where we had to transport both cargo and boats over-


THE RAPIDS OF THE MADEIRA AND THE MAMORE. 73

land, in the usual troublesome way. However, the satisfaction of think-
ing that we had only two more of this long series of rapids before us
gave us new vigour and life. It is true that the first of them, Guasard
Guasst,* was not quite as easy to pass as we could have wished. We
had to unload, and to track the empty boats through one of the narrow
channels wrought by the floods (as at Ribeirao) into the hard quartzose
metamorphic formation; but at Guasard Menim, the last one, we could
draw them after us, with full cargo, against the strong current.

Every one of us, I believe, took a long breath of relief after it,
wnd thought the terminus of our long voyage—the Missions on the
Mamoré,—though still distant some 250 miles, quite at hand.

The river now presents the smooth unruffled surface of a lake ;
no sound breaks the majestic stillmess of Nature; there is neither the
lonely cottage of the Seringueiro, nor even the smooth roof of palm-
leaves of the Indian malocca, to be scen anywhere. Though the
elevation of the river-banks above low-water mark is no more than
23 or 26 feet, and they are therefore inundated every twenty or
twenty-five years by extraordinary floods, yet the soil is considerably
raised above that level at some distance from the shore : ; and nothing
could be more erroneous than to believe the Valley of the Madeira to
be subject to annual inundations, as is the case, for instance, with the
shores of the Itonama and the Upper Mamoré in Bolivia.

Not the floods, but the dangerous vicinity of wild, murderous
Indians who haunt the forests near the confluence of the Mamoré and
Guaporé, together with intermittent fevers and the difficulties of
communication with the Amazon, are the chief drawbacks to successful
colonisation in these vast countries. The Indians, it is well known,
have nowhere resisted the influence of civilisation for any length of time ;
and here also they will have to recede before it. The fevers, it is true,
are hard to bear; but in this respect also the land must improve in
the course of time, as the forests continue to be cleared; while the
last of the evils I have enumerated will soon be remedied, Jet us hope,
by a line of steamers on the Lower Madeira, the construction of a
railroad along the rapids, and a second line of steamers above them.t

* Tn the Guarani, or Tupi language, guajar4é means a wild fruit; guassu, large ;
merim, small.

- t Even before we left Rio de Janeiro, a company was formed there for a steam line
on the Lower Madeira, and had actually begun regular service.



74 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

There, in spite of its numerous and sharp bends, the river is navigable
by steamers of 34 fect draught, as it has an average depth of 6 feet,
a width of from 270 to 830 yards, and a rapidity of from 1 foot
to 11 feet per second. As most of our canoes were anything but
water-tight after their three months’ hard work, and especially after
their repeated draggings on land over stocks and stones, we resolved
to caulk them before we proceeded further. The Castanheira (Ber-
tholletia excelsa), whose fruit is known in Europe under the name of
Brazil nuts, supplied us with the required material; and, as there was
plenty of these gigantic trees rising tall and straight as columns, our
Mojos had little trouble to collect a sufficient quantity of their bark.
They first made with an axe two horizontal incisions at an interval of
7 feet from each other, and then with wooden wedges loosened a
strip of bark of about 24 feet breadth. With continued beating the
outer bark is separated from the bast, and the latter is reduced to
a bundle of soft fibres, which, after being washed and dried in the
sun, are fit for use. While so employed, one of our paddlers was stung
in the hand by a poisonous ant (Tucandeira) of nearly an inch and a half
long, and in a short time his hand and arm were swollen up to the
shoulder. As I treated him successfully with salmiak, one of the
Bolivians told me that in his country the use of balms similar to those
of the South African poison-doctors, in such cases, was quite common.
He had himself witnessed their efficacy in the case of an Indian wounded
by the poisonous sting of a ray. What may be considered the healing
principle in these antidotes I cannot tell—dicant Paduani !—I limit
myself to recording the fact.

In such urgent cases it is only natural that people should invent
all sorts of extraordinary drugs in countries where there are neither
physicians nor apothecaries’ shops. Once, in the province of Minas,
while opening a picada through a piece of dense virgin-forest with a
few negroes, a fine hunting-dog belonging to a neighbouring planter,
which had followed me and had afterwards been hunting upon his own
account, came suddenly up with hanging ears and tail, and whining
piteously. On inspection, we found a tumour with two small red points
on his neck, swelling almost visibly, which the negroes one and all
declared to be the bite of a poisonous snake. As nothing else was
at hand, a piece of very strong fwmo de Minas (Minas tobacco) was
steeped in water; the wound was washed with some of it, and the


THE RAPIDS OF THE MADEIRA AND THE MAMORE. 75

rest poured down the dog’s throat. As I had not so much faith in
the efficacy of tobacco as my blacks, I ordered one of them, a sharp
lad of sixteen, to take poor Chamyl to our tent, which was about
a mile off, to there saddle one of our mules, and to fetch some ammonia
from the next town, a distance of about eight miles. In the evening
we returned to our improvised abode, speculating on the fate of our pet,
whom we gave up as either dead or dying. But as soon as he heard
our voices he came out barking a joyous welcome, and wagging his
tail just in his old way, and showing no sign of illness. Our black
cook, who, together with an old grey-haired African, had kept house
the while, told us on inquiry, with a sly smile, that Pai Sé (that
is, Pap& José), the old black, had given him “um remedio,” a drug,
which had cured him instantly. Pai Sé, when asked what miraculous
drug this was, showed us rather reluctantly a little parcel or bag of
dark colour about two inches long and one broad, which he wore
suspended by a cord round his neck, and which was so grimed with
dirt and grease that we abstained from closer investigation. He had
simply washed the amulet, and the dog had drunk the water! As
we asked for the ammonia, he informed us with a derisive grin that
the messenger was not yet back, and gruffly added that the dog was
well enough now, and would not want the drugs of the whites. This
was so true that when the lad, out of breath with the hot ride, returned
some time afterwards with the ammonia, we put it aside unopened, for
Chamyl was quite well and in the best of spirits, and he, perhaps,
lives to the present day.

The belief that men who have scratched their backs all over with
the tooth of a poisonous serpent will be uninjured by the bite of any,
is spread all over Brazil; and I have seen trustworthy people who
assured me that they saw such persons safely touch rattlesnakes.
Unfortunately I never could ascertain whether they were imposed on, or
whether the human system, being gradually impregnated with the
poisonous matter, may indeed be protected by it against a sudden access
of it, as is the case, more or less, with the vaccine virus.

We now were near the mouth of the Guaporé, and doubly vigilant
for the savages said to haunt these regions. Our arms were held in
readiness, and nobody was allowed to wander from the halting-place, lest
we should sce one of our company pierced by the arrows of an invisible
enemy. These daring brigands, in their robbing expeditions, rove even



76 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

into the neighbourhood of the Forte do Principe da Beira, where they
have killed several soldiers under the very guns of the decaying fort ;
and they have ascended the Mamoré, almost up to the old Mission of
Exaltacion; some of whose members, who had gone down stream in a
boat to gather cacao, were once driven back by a discharge of arrows,
which killed and wounded several of them. Such is the audacity of these
dangerous banditti that, a few years ago, they seized upon the steersman
of a Bolivian boat who had leaped ashore, as it glided along a sand-bank,
in quest of gulls’ eggs. Under the very eyes of his companions, and
notwithstanding his own desperate resistance, he was dragged into the
forest, where the savages lay concealed. The surprise was so sudden
that the Bolivians did not fire a single shot after them; and, though
they pursued them immediately, and heard the piteous cries of the poor
kidnapped man piercing far through the wood, they could not save him,
either from being roasted, or from a slavery perhaps worse than even
death. The rapidity with which the naked son of the forest makes his
way through the thorny shrubberies, without so much as scratching his
smooth brown skin, is quite astonishing, and is unattainable, not only by
the white man but also by the half-civilised Moxos Indians of the
Missions. It is matched only by the swiftness of the tapir and the
jaquar

From these repeated attacks, the Bolivians stand in such terror of the
treacherous savages that they always encamp on the farthest end of some
great sand-bank, so as to have as much open space as possible between
the canoes and the forest-border ; a position which at least gives them
time to take up their arms, unless the red-skins follow their usual tacties
of sending, unseen, their murderous shafts from behind the dense sereen
of shrubs.*

Of course, the danger is much less in the descent, when the canoes
glide along in the middle of the stream with the swiftness of arrows,
than it is in the ascent; when they advance but slowly, and must,
besides, be kept near to the shore to escape the full force of the current.

After all I heard from our companions, I cannot but ascribe it to
our good luck—and also, perhaps, to the sharp crack. of our rifles,
which we used of evenings to fire at the ugly flat skull of some

* A Dr. Eiras, of Rio de Janeiro; sent out to Santa Cruz de la Sierra in Bolivia as
Brazilian consul, was mortally wounded on the way by several arrows. discharged from
behind the trees as he stole along close to the shore to shoot some water-fowl.


THE RAPIDS OF THE MADEIRA AND THE MAMORE. 77

basking alligator—that we were unmolested during our stay of a
fortnight in the domain of these robbers, On the Ist of September
we reached at last the confluence cf the Mamoré and the Guaporé ;
the former of which has a width of 330 yards at low, and of 550
yards at high water.

Though the Guarors is considerably broader than the Mamoré (550
yards at low and 760 yards at high water), its volume is less by a third,
as we found upon careful measurings of its profile and its rapidity.*

The shores of both these rivers are low, but not exposed to the
ordinary floods. The clear greenish tinge of the Guaporé is striking,
while the Mamoré is decidedly yellow. The latter, in its lower course,
has an extraordinary number of short, sharp curves, on whose convex
sides there are uniformly sand-banks, sometimes of considerable length
—the favourite brooding-places of the guils; thousands and thousands
of whose gray brown-spotted eggs we there found in their flat dish-
like nests. The vegetation on the shores, which had lost much of
its magnificence since we left the regions of the rapids and approached
the Campos of Bolivia, became more and more prairie-like and poor.
Low shrubs and stunted bushes took the place of the splendid trees
of the lower valley. A small cluster of palms, bending over the
smooth mirror of the water, enlivened only at mtervals the dull
monotony of the scenery. Some spots on the left, where the Pedra
Canga (a porous sandstone) appeared in horizontal strata, already
showed the native growth of the Campos;—nothing but strong, tall
grass and thorny dwarf bushes.

In the direction of the Campos between the. Guaporé and the
Machupo, on which the ostriches and the great stags, that already are
getting scarce in the neighbourhood of the Missions, are yet found
im innumerable herds, we several times saw dense columns of smoke
by day, and the reflection of fires by night, lighted probably by
wild Indians. On the left bank of the Mamoré, the Campos un-
doubtedly extend to the Jaté and the Beni, affording excellent pasture
to the last remains of those enormous herds of cattle bred by the
Jesuits a hundred years ago, and, after their departure, almost. wilfully
destroyed, in a manner which hardly admits of excuse.

As I shall have to revert to this theme, I may here only mention

* See the hydrographic results in the Appendix.



78 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

that, twelve years ago, a fat cow could be purchased at the Missions
for three pesos (ten shillings); whereas it now fetches about thrice
that sum. Near the mouth of the Matucare, a small influent on the
right, such a fresh breeze set in, inviting us to unfurl our sails, that
simultaneously, on all the canoes of our little fleet, preparations were
made to profit by it. Masts of every kind—both straight and crooked ;
some vertical, others bending forward or backward—were set up; and
sails, of shapes certainly not to be found in nautical handbooks,
were utilised for the occasion; not omitting hammocks and musqui-
teiros; but our heavy boats glided along under them, nevertheless,
with unwonted swiftness. We passed in this way the only little rapid
of the Mamoré, with a slope of 2 inches and a length of 660 feet,
caused by a ridge of Pedra Canga stretching right across the river.
As this Pedra Canga is situated (as on the Amazon) on soft, finely
laminated clay, which is easily solved by water, the layer of not
very hard sandstone loses its base and tumbles down in large frag-
ments. This process of breaking off, and the consequent receding of
the rapid, will go on until the whole bank is destroyed; when the
river will quietly flow along in its widened and deepened bed, leaving
only the rocks on both the shores as final memorials of the former
obstruction. These signs being found on eight or ten places on the
Mamoré, I do not doubt that, ages ago, it had as many rapids thus
levelled by the river itself in the course of time.

The Marvcaré affords an easy road, at high water level, to the
former Mission of Sao Joaquim on the Machupo; the country being
a dead flat for a considerable extent, and the little lake, whence
rises Matucaré, discharging itself on the opposite side, in the direction
of the Machupo.

In the dry months, the voyage between Exaltacion and Sao Joaquim
must be made on foot, by barely accessible paths in the woods; and
I cannot omit to mention here, in proof of the hard condition of
Bolivian Indians, that two of them, carrying seven or eight arrobas
(about 240 pounds), were paid one peso (about four francs) for this
trip, out of which they have to provide their own food. In this
five days’ march they have to cross vast swamps with their heavy
loads, cruelly tormented by the mosquitos at night, and moreover,
exposed to the attacks of wild Indians, who seem to have taken up
their station in this wilderness. In fact, they are no better off than


THE RAPIDS OF THE MADEIRA AND THE MAMORE. 79

slaves; and this state of things can be remedied only by improving
the communications, and thereby destroying the monopoly of commerce
im the hands of a few enterprising but unscrupulous speculators.

The Campos on the left bank of the Mamoré are inhabited by the
Chacovos, a peaceful tribe of Indians, who used to visit Exaltacion
from time to time; but of late they seem to have retired more into
the unknown interior. They consider the herds of wild cattle in the
Jampos between the Mamoré and Beni as their property, and resent
any hunting or killing of them by the inhabitants of Exaltacion
and Santa Ana.

At two days’ journey below the ancient Mission of Exaltacion, we
found the first rude beginnings of agriculture, plantains and cacao
planted by the Indians of the Mission; in close proximity to which
was the first civilised house we had seen for months. It belonged
to an old Brazilian, Antonio de Barros Cardoza, the same who rendered
such material assistance to Lieutenant Gibbon, of the U. S. Navy,
eighteen years ago, and whose aid was so important to us, when
preparing to return. He is a good-looking man, of about fifty years;
his brown, weather-beaten face and strong frame showing the true
Portuguese type, and his vivacity and activity contrasting singularly
with his long, grey beard. His house, a low, one-storied edifice,
with a large open shed that serves at once as sitting-room, store,
hed-room for guests, and kitchen, stands on a projecting rock on the
right margin, and bears the name of Cerrito. We spent a couple of
pleasant hours with him, talking about the war in Paraguay, the
politics of Bolivia, and the future Madcira Railway ; and we left him,
after having accepted his kind offer to lodge us at a little house of
his at Exaltacion.

In the “port” of that Mission, where we landed presently, a few
small canoes and two larger barques of the same unwieldy shape as
ours, were moored at the foot of the steep slope, while on its top
some miserable thatched huts, with stunted bananas and the dwarf
wind-torn growth of the Campos around them, mark the place that
bears the high-sounding name of Purrro pp Exaracton pr LA SANTA
IRUZ.

Some Indians bathing, and a couple of brown women filling their
large earthen jars, were the only objects that imparted an air of life
to the melancholy scene.



80 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

On our way over the dry Campos to the Pueblo, distant about
a mile anda quarter from the port, we met, soon after its roofs had come
in sight over the dense foliage of some tamarinds, a few Indian
women, who greeted us in their own language in a peculiarly quiet,
not unfriendly way, quite their own. The literal translation of this
and its proper answer, @

greeting is: ‘Well! have you arrived?”
V’Indienne, is a long-drawn Hm! There is a Portuguese saying—

“Cada roca seu fuso ;
Cada terra seu uso.”
(Each distaff its spindle ;
Each country its use.)

and so we will not deride the poor Mojos for their greeting, queer as
it sounds.

The first impression of the Pucblo is rather a dreary one; large,
erass-grown. streets bordered by mouldering house-posts, showing the
former importance of the place, and leading to a lonely Plaza in the
centre of the regularly-planned site. The low white-washed cottages
have all, both in the Plaza and in the side streets, far-projecting roofs,
supported by wooden columns, and so forming a continuous verandah.
Only a few of them show the luxury of a small window, shut with
a wooden grate; the rest have no opening but the door.

One side of the Plaza, which is about 830 feet in length, is
entirely occupied by the Church, with an isolated campanile, and the
former Collegium of the reverend Padres, which boasts a large verandah
as well on the ground-floor as on the second story. The projecting
roof of the gable-side of the church rests on four nicely-carved wooden
columns, and serves the double purpose of forming an airy, spacious
hall, and of protecting against rain the gaudy paintings of the facade,
which is of adobe (sun-dried brick) like the whole range of buildings.

Although these do not answer all the requirements of architectural
beauty, yet it must be owned that the fathers of the Socicty of Jesus
made the most of such poor material, and erected therewith edifices
which have resisted the storms of a century and a half, and have
been well adapted to their needs and to the climate. To this day, a
hundred years after that other powerful storm, which for ever deprived
the Jesuits of their Missions in Paraguay, Brazil, and Bolivia, together
with all their rich incomes, these buildings could have been as well
preserved as if they had been of stone, if Spanish indolence had not


THE RAPIDS OF THE MADEIRA AND THE MAMORE. 81_

neglected to make even the most necessary repairs. Still, such is the
impression of vitality made by these edifices, that we expected every
moment to sce one of the padres appear from out the dark background
of the grey, weather-beaten colonnade.

The absence of trees, and the number of tall crucifixes (the largest
of which is erected in the middle of the Plaza), give it the appearance
of the dreary interior of a quiet monastery,—an impression which is
only heightened by the grave Indians gliding noiselessly along the
extensive corridors in’ their long white camisetas.

The sacristan, an Indian, readily opened to us a side-door of the
church, and we passed out of the dazzling light of the declining sun
into the mystic twilight of the aisle, after having been amused with
the grotesque ornamentation and the gaudy colours of the pilastres and
statuettes of the outer hall.

A detailed description of the church, and of the life and doings
of the Indians in the Missions, will follow hereafter.

Our task now was—and it was neither an easy nor an agreeable
one—to get a sufficient number of paddlers for our return, as those
who had come with us from the Amazon had been absent from their
families for eight months, and were unwilling to undergo the troubles

and dangers of the same voyage again after only a few days’ repose.
The welfare of the traveller in this regard depends entirely on the
good or the ill-will of the Director of the Pueblo, who has the title
of Corregidor, and of the chieftain of the Indians, who exercises the
greatest influence on them to the present day. But as we had been
commissioned by the Brazilian Government, and as the President of
the Republic had been notified of our arrival by the Brazilian Ambas-
sador, our relation to both the Corregidor and the Prefect of the Depart-
ment differed materially from that of an ordinary Bolivian merchant
of Trinidad or Santa Cruz, who might be hunting for paddles in the
Missions, and we therefore had a right to count on their support.
On the morning following our arrival at Evxaltacion, we went in
person to the house of the Corregidor, a still youthful-looking man
of the true Spanish type, who lived on the ground floor of the
Collegium, which is kept in rather better repair than the first story.
He received us in a wide hall paved with bricks, between which
sections of large bones, probably of bullocks, formed simple patterns
of a rough mosaic. After we had all been seated on heavy, rudely

G



82 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

carved arm-chairs, or on similar benches, and the inevitable cigarros
had been handed round by an Indian girl, he informed us that he
was charged by the “Prefeito do Departamento” to assist us in every
possible way in the exploration of a. river which was of as great
importance to Bolivia as to Brazil, but that he greatly regretted he
could not obtain in the thinly-peopled Pueblo of Exaltacion the whole
number of paddles we required, viz., forty-two men, and that we were
to wait until the Prefect residing at Trinidad, whither he was about
to send an express, should decide out of which of the next Missions
the rest of our crew was to be taken.

As we began to apprehend that we were going to have as long
a delay here as at Mandos, which, at the then advanced season, would

225 feet.

GROUND-PLAN OF THE FORMER MISSION OF EXALTACION.

prove (as it did) of evil consequences to us, I resolved to face the
hardships of another fortnight’s voyage in a small canoe, and to go
myself to Trinidad.

I chose the lightest canoe at hand, and, availing myself of the
clear moonlight nights, succeeded in reaching Trinidad (a distance of
150 miles) in six days. There is no rapid in this part of the river,
but in some places there is a strong current. Arrived at Trinidad,
which is laid out exactly on the plan of Exaltacion, I was kindly
received by the Prefect, a Frenchman, and the Chefe da Policia, a
true Bolivian of Indian descent (of the Guichoa tribe). Luckily for
us all, I was enabled to set out on my return on the second day,
with the necessary orders for the Corregidores of San Joaquin and


THE RAPIDS OF THE MADEIRA AND THE MAMORE. 83

Exaltacion, and with the promise that from Trinidad itself a part of
the crew should follow me within three days. Descending the river
without intermission, I arrived at Exaltacion in two days and two
nights, having on the way encountered a heavy squall and rain of
tropical violence, and sustained the loss of the coberta or tolda, the
hide-covered awning of the canoe, which was caught by the branches
of a low-lying tree as we glided swiftly along the banks. Having
immediately despatched a messenger to San Joaquin, we with all
haste set about the repairs of four of the barques and the collecting
of provisions (chiefly Indian corn-flour and sun-dried meat), in which
operations we were so valiantly assisted by old Cardozo that we were
enabled to leave Exaltacion after a month’s sojourn, and to turn
the bows of our barques homewards.

It was the 19th of October, and high time it was for our departure !
Already fearful squalls sweeping over the country told us that the
rainy season was at hand; and, if this were to find us still in the
region of the rapids, we surely should expiate our delay with inter-
mittent fevers.

The disheartening story of the Bolivian merchant overtaken by
the floods there, who had to bury eight of his erew within a few
days (the rest having had a narrow escape), haunted us incessantly ;
and we did our best to make the detailed maps of the river-course,
and to take the soundings of its depth, with all possible dispatch.
Luckily we had already made the astronomical observations on our
ascent. We arrived at Santo Antonio as early as the 18th of
November, yet not without having, all of us, suffered in various
degrees from fits of the fever; which, though subdued, was not cured
by repeated doses of quinine, so long as we continued to be exposed
to the same pernicious influences.

The labour and trouble of passing the rapids are less, of course,
on the descent than on the ascent; but the risks to vessels are
greater; and, with the true Indian carelessness of the crew, it is
almost miraculous that they escape from being wrecked on the rocks,
which are half covered with the bubbling white spray. Several times
our barques were in imminent danger, and with them all the results
of our troublesome tour; especially once at Guajaré, and another time
in the currents below Bananciras.

The unloading at the principal breaks, which in the descent also

G2



SE ro ee a ee

84 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

are unapproachable, the transporting of the freight and vessels over
stone and rocks, the frequent breaking and cracking of ribs (of the
vessels, I mean), and their hurried repair, are just the same as in
the ascent. Suffice it then to say that at last we saw with relieved
hearts our boats floating again on the smooth surface of the Amazon,
and at Mandos the warmth of the greeting extended to us by friends
and acquaintance was intensified by the circumstance that only a few
days before the newspapers had stated most positively that one and
all of us had been killed and eaten by the Caripunas. On the 14th
of December, 1868, we arrived safely at Para by the same Belem
which had first brought us to Mandos; and on the 4th of January,
1869, at Rio de Janeiro, which we had left fourteen months before, a
little less sunburnt, and unweakened by intermittent fevers.





SST (MApErRA).

LE

IMEVAL FOI

>
as

IANT OF THE PI

r

A ¢

>
v

UNDEI

HALT



CHAPTER TII.

CANOE AND CAMP LIFE.

The Start.—Preparation of the
Bast Shirts and Panama-Hats.
— Breakfast.— Turtle Soup.—
Hunting the Alligators.—Night

Camp.

tev) = 4
oTTE lower course of the

y Madeira presents, for
more than four hundred
and sixty miles, a picture
of grand simplicity and, it
must be owned, monotony, ‘
which, magnificent as it
appears at first, -wearies
the eye and sickens the
heart at last,—a dead calm
on an unruffled, mirror-
like sheet of water glaring
in the sun, and, as far as the eye can reach, two walls of dark
green forest with the dark-blue firmament above them ; in the fore-
ground, slender palms, and gigantie orchid-covered trunks, with
blooming creepers hanging from the wave-worn shore, with its red
earthslips, down into the turbid floods. No hill breaks the finely
indented line of the fohage, which everywhere bounds the horizon,
ouly here and there a few palm-covered sheds peep out of the green ;
and still more rarely do we sight one of. their quict dark inmates.
Stately kingfishers looking thoughtfully into the river, white herons



86 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

standing for hours on one leg, and alligators lying so motionless at
the mouth of some rivulet that their jaggy tails and scarcely pro-
truding skulls might easily be taken for some half-sunken trunks, are
the only animals to be seen; and certainly they do not increase
the liveliness of the scene. Dreary and monotonous as the landscape,
the days too pass in unvaried succession.

With the first dawn of day, before the white mist that hides the
smooth surface of the river has disappeared with the rays of the rising
sun, the day’s work begins. The boatswains call their respective crews ;
the tents are broken up as quickly as possible; the cooking apparatus,
the hammocks and hides that served as beds, are taken on board
together with our arms and mathematical instruments; and every one
betakes himself to his post. The pagaias (paddles) are dipped into
the water, and the prows of our heavy boats turn slowly from the shore
to the middle of the stream. Without the loss of a minute, the oars
are plied for three or four hours, at a steady but rather quick rate,
until a spot on shore is discovered casy of access and offering a dry
fire-place and some fuel for the preparation of breakfast. If it be on
one of the long sandbanks, a roof is made of one of the sails, that
rarely serve for anything else; if in the wood, the undergrowth, in -the
shade of some large tree, is cleared for the reception of our little table
and tent-chairs.

The functions of the culinary chef for the white faces, limited to
the preparation of a dish of black beans, with some fish or turtle, are
simple. enough, but, to be appreciated, certainly require the hearty
appetite acquired by active life in the open air. The Indians have to
cook by turns for their respective boats’ crews; their unalterable bill
of fare being a pap of flour of Indian corn or mandioca, with fresh or
dried fish, or a piece of jacaré (alligator).

Most of those who are not busy cooking, spend their time preparing
new bast shirts, the material for which was found almost everywhere
in the neighbourhood of our halting-places: Soon the wood is alive
with the sound of hatchets and the crack of falling trees; and, even
before they are summoned to. breakfast, they return with pieces of a
silky bast of about 43 yards long and somewhat less than 14 yard wide.
‘Their implements for shirt-making are of primitive simplicity,—a heavy
wooden hammer with notches, called maceta, and a round piece of wood
to work upon. Continuously beaten with the maceta, the fibres of the


aration of the Cé i or Bark-Shirt. 2. Wild Cocoa.

MOJOS INDIANS AT BREAKFAST (Manperra).





CANOE AND CAMP LIFE. 87

bast become loosened, until the originally hard piece of wood gets soft
and flexible, and about double its former breadth. After it has been
washed, wrung out to remove the sap, and dried in the sun, it has
the appearance of a coarse woollen stuff of a bright whitish yellow or

TOUJOURS PERDRIX !

light brown, disclosing two main layers of wavy fibres held together
by smaller filaments. A more easily prepared and better working-
garment for a tropical climate is hardly to be found than this, called



88 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

cascara by the Indians of Bolivia, and turury* by those of the Amazon.
[ts cut is as simple and classical as its material. A hole is cut in the
middle of a piece about 10 feet long, to pass the head through; and
the depending skirt is sewn together on both sides, from below up to
the height of the girdle, which usually is a piece of cotton string or
liana.
Another branch of industry our Indians were busy at, in their hours
of leisure, was the fabrication of straw hats, with the young leaves of a
kind of little palm, the same which supplies the excellent hats imported
from Ecuador and Pert, and known in Europe under the name of Chile
or Panama hats. Dexterity at all sorts of wickerwork seems to be innate
to this race ; and the prettiest little baskets, and the finest mats of coloured
palm leaves, are to be bought on the Missions of the Mamoré at the lowest
prices.t
But all these occupations are left at the call of the first-mate; who
has the proud title of Capitano. The boats’ crews crowd round their
pots; cach one receives his allotted portion in a calabash or a basin of
horn; and their spoons of the same material are soon in full activity. If
a jacaré has lately been shot, or caught in a laco (sling), every one, after
roasting his own piece of it on the spit, proceeds to cut at the large slices
of the white meat (which, though in appearance like fish, is as tough as
India-rubber) with the satisfaction usually produced by three or four hours
of hard rowing on view of anything eatable. One tribe especially, the
| Canichanas, from the former Mission of San Pedro at the Mamoré, think
roast caiman the finest eating in the world; while others, the Cayuabas
from Exaltacion, and the Mojos, from Trinidad, whose palates are some-
what more refined, prefer beef, fish, or turtle to the musk-exhaling
saurian. Notably the turtles, which are not found on the Guaporé and
Mamoré (they are not met with above the rapids of the Madeira) are
prized by them, though we grew rather tired of them, and no wonder.
On the lower Madeira, at our fires, there was almost daily going on. the
cooking of turtles, of all sizes, from the full-grown one of a yard in
length to the smallest of the size of a hand; and in every variety of
preparation too—whole, and chopped up as for soup; stewed; and
roasted in their own shell or on the spit.

* Curatart legalis, Martius.
+ At Rio de Janeiro a Panama hat costs twenty and more dollars ; in Bolivia about
five or six.



Na
B — a
oD ~~,

CANOE AND CAMP LIFE. 89

Bathing in the river, immediately after meals, is a luxury invariably
indulged in by all the Indians; and I never remarked that it was
attended by any evil consequences to them.

After a rest of two hours’ duration, the cooking utensils, the ham-
mocks, and improvised tents, were carried on board again, and the
voyage continued. A second halt was made after rowing for two or three
hours, when we came in sight of a good place for fishing, such as the
mouth of some smaller river, or an extensive mud bank. Such places

ALLIGATOR-ILUNTING.

were usually vecognisable from afar, by the multitude of snow-white
herons, and of long caimans, which, finding it out before us, crowded
there in peaceful unity, and with similar intentions. The vicinity of the
scaly monsters is scarcely heeded by the Indians, who fish and take their
bath, langhing and jesting, though somewhat hugging the shore, just
as if there were no such thing as the tail or the tooth of the jacaré in
the world; and, indeed, these creatures are themselves in much greater
danger than the red-skins. When the last steak of alligator has been
consumed, one of the Canichanas is sure to ask leave to have some
fun, and to provide at the same time for their next dinner. Of course



90 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

the permission is always granted, as the sport keeps up their spirits, and
spares our provisions. Without loss of time, then, one of them, having
carefully fastened a strong loop of raw hide at the end of a long pole, and
having dexterously slipped off his bast shirt, creeps slowly through the
shallow water, pole and sling in hand, as near as possible to the alligator,
which looks on at these preparations with perfect apathy, only now and
then betraying a sign of life by a lazy movement of its powerful tail.
But it does not take its eyes off the Indian as he crawls nearer and
nearer. The fatal sling is at arm’s length from its muzzle, and yet it does
not see it. Asif under the influence of witchcraft, it continues to stare
with its large protruding eyes at the bold hunter, who in the next moment
has thrown the loop over its head, and suddenly drawn it to with a
strong pull. The other Indians, who the while have been cowering
motionless on shore, now rush into the water to the help of their
companion, and four or five of them land the ugly creature that with
all its might struggles to get back into the water, lashing the sand
with its tail and showing its long teeth; but a few vigorous blows
with an axe on the tail and skull soon render it tame enough. If, instead
of dragging back, the alligator were only to rush forward boldly to the
attack of the Indians, they would, of a certainty, leave pole and sling
and run for their lives; but this bright idea never seems to occur to
the uncouth animal, and the strife always ends with its death. Though
there were more than a dozen of them killed during the voyage, I
never thought of sending a rifle-bullet through the thick skull of one,
except on one occasion, when I was afraid that one of our Cani-
chanas was about to make too close an acquaintance with the hard,
jagged tail of an extraordinarily strong monster, which measured full
164 feet.

Even before the huge spoil is cut up, four musk-glands, placed by
twos under its jaw, and on its belly, near the beginning of the tail,
must be carefully taken out, to prevent the diffusion, over the whole
body, of the penetrating odour of the greasy, brown liquid they contain.
These glands, which are about an inch and a half long and as thick as a
finger, are carefully tied up aud suspended in the sun to dry. Mixed
with a little rose-water, their contents serve, as we were told, to
perfume the raven-black tresses of the elegant Bolivian ladies at Santa
‘ruz de la Sierra and Cochabamba, in spite of, or rather by reason
of, their strong scent, which gives the headache to all save these


CATCHING AN ALLIGATOR WITH LASSO (Mapzrna).





. Lee me oe
oe tes = 7 =— ; = =

CANOE AND CAMP LIFE. 91

strong-nerved Sefioritas, who love a bull-fight above everything,

who know how to roll the cigarito, and to dance the fandango with

i matchless grace, but who scarcely are able to write their own names.

After such a pleasant interlude of fishing or hunting, the paddles

are plied with renewed vigour until the evening, when sleeping quarters

{ are selected, either on a sandbank or in the forest. The canoes are

moored by strong piassaba-ropes in some recess of the bank, where

they are protected against drifting trunks; the tents are erected, and

preparations ensue for the principal meal. Meanwhile, after the very

short interval of twilight usual in the tropics, Night almost suddenly

throws her dark veil over the yalley, and the bright constellations of
the Southern sky in quiet majesty adorn the firmament.

While we prepare to take astronomical observations, half-a-dozen
large fires are lighted round about, in whose fitful blaze the neigh-
bouring forest trees appear like huge phantoms, looking contemptuously
down on us, poor tiny mortals. Our Indians warm themselves in the
cheerful glow, smoking, and chatting of the day’s adventures, or rather
of what are regarded as such—unusual good or ill-luck at fishing and
hunting; the casual meeting of some canoe; or the sight of a serin-
gueiro’s poor cottage. Work over, they take off the rough cascara,
wd put on the camiseta, a cotton garment without sleeves, resembling
2 wide poncho sewn together at the sides, and whose dazzling whiteness
1s set off by two scarlet stripes along the seams. The ample folds and
the simple cut of the garment, which is made by the Indian women
of the Missions on very primitive looms, give quite a stately, classical
appearance to the numerous groups round the fires. Such must have
been the aspect presented by the halting-places of those daring seafarers,

the Phcenicians, who were the first to call into life an international
commerce, and whose light-rigged barques first ventured to distant
shores, to bring home the precious amber and the useful tin. Only
the dense swarms of mosquitos, which set in immediately after sunset,
remind. us rather unpleasantly that we are far off from those happy
Northern regions, where such a nuisance can hardly be well imagined.
Especially in the dense forest beneath cacao-bushes, or under the
close leafage of the large figueiras, where no breath of air incommodes
those light-winged tormentors, it is quite impossible, for the European
at least, to close an eye without the shelter of a mosquiteiro (mosquito-
net); and we could but wonder at our Indians, most of whom did



92 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

without it. After supper they simply spread a hide on the ground, on
which, with no covering other than the starry firmament above them,
they slept undisturbed till the dawn, only occasionally brushing away,
as if by way of diversion, the most obtrusive of the little fiends. The
capitanos only, and one or other of the older rowers, allow themselves
the luxury of good cotton hammocks, which are also made by their wives
in the Missions.

Such, with few variations, was the course of our daily life, until we
reached the regions of the rapids, when, of course, the hundred little
incidents connected with the dragging of the canoes through narrow,
foaming channels, and with carrying the goods and the vessels’ themselves
overland, disturbed the monotony of this rude forest life.



~et tine,

CHAPTER IV.

HUNTING AND FISHING IN THE
PROVINCES OF AMAZON
AND MATO GROSSO.

The Piré-ruet.—The Peixe-boi.
—The Boto.— Fishing with
the Covo.—Tapir-hunting.—

The Barreiros.

a
\ O the inhabitants of the above-
mentioned provinces hunting
and, still more, fishing are of
an importance hardly to be
estimated in Europe; and in
any, be it the slightest,
description of these lands,
special attention must be
directed to these branches of
national economy ; which are
of small consequence in civi-
yes lised countries. There the
colossal turtles, the pird-ruct (Sudis gigas),* and the lamantin or peixe-
boi, are captured, as the tapirs, the wild hogs and deer, are hunted,

not for sport, but for subsistence, for the daily food of the inhabitants.
The ox, though no longer an altogether unknown animal in these
regions, 1s still strange enough ; and its meat will be rarely met with in
the isolated huts of the Indians and mestizoes, for the few heads of cattle,

brought up-stream from the lower course of the Amazon by the fortnightly
| * From pird, fish; and ruch, red.



94 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

steamers, barely suffice to supply the wants of the little towns, such
as Mandos, Santarem, ete.* Other of our domestic animals also, such
as pigs, goats and sheep, are very rarely found near the huts of the
riverines, though the first would thrive excellently. A number of
cackling hens, and perhaps a.few ducks, are their only live stock; as they

SUBMERGE]D FOREST.

give no trouble whatever, and find abundant food on the soft earth, and
in the roots and fallen leaves near the cottages.

The marvellous bounty of nature, on the one hand, and the innate
disposition, confirmed by habit, to do as their fathers have done before
them, on the other, will sufficiently explain why Indians and mestizoes so

* The population of the Brazilian coast, living on fresh and dried fish all the year
round, go to the nearest town regularly on Easter Sunday to buy a piece of beef; for
once a year, they say, one must have meat.

ee


@-
a

HUNTING AND FISHING IN THE PROVINCE OF AMAZON. 95

markedly prefer the life of hunters and fishers to the less exciting and
more settled vocation of breeders of domestic animals. From his earliest
years, the young Tapuyo (Indian of the Amazon Valley ) accompanies his
father either on the open river or on the inundated plains, where, in the
cool shade of large trees, or amid the submerged tops of palms which are
mirrored in the smooth dark water, they quietly lie in ambush, patiently
awaiting the proper moment for throwing their harpoons into the broad
back of the piré-ruci, a fish of 10 to 13 feet long, covered (as if it were
armour) with big scales bordered by a sharp scarlet line. When caught,
it is dragged on land, opened up the whole length of its back, the
vertebrae taken out, and the meat salted and dried in the sun. In its
fresh state it is not very palatable; but when prepared in this way,
as it is largely consumed by both rich and poor from Pard to the frontiers
of Pert, it makes quite an abominable dish, decidedly inferior to cod-fish.
And this is not the worst of it. As the meat is very hygroscopic, and
the atmosphere, especially in the rainy season, saturated with aqueous
vapours, the foul-smelling slices have to be laid out in the sun from
time to time; and as the vendciros (shopkeepers) in small towns like
Manaos ‘seem to think no spot more appropriate for that operation than
the pavement at their doors, their neighbours and passengers have
the pleasure of at least smelling the nasty fish, if they have been lucky
enough to escape it at. table.

Very different is the lamantin or manati, a fresh-water cetacean,
which, despite its Portuguese name of peixe-boi (ox-fish), derived from
its broad snout resembling that of an ox,’is no more a fish than its
gigantic cousin of the sea, the sperm-whale. It abides especially in
the quiet lakes on the borders of the large rivers, which are covered
with a profusion of long reed-grass and wild rice, the chief food of
the peixe-boi. Its flesh is fat and nice, and, when properly prepared,
decidedly reminds one of pork.

Although fishing is of far greater importance than hunting to
the inhabitants of these countries, for the simple reason that the
latter requires powder and lead, and a far costlier weapon than their
own bow* or simple iron hook, I will spare the reader the infliction
of a dry ichthyologic register of all the species and varieties that people
the main stream and its endless ramifications. Their number has been

* Bows and arrows are used everywhere on these rivers for shooting fish and turtle ;
but only wild Indians employ them for hunting on land.



96 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

augmented, by several hundreds, by the discoveries of M. Agassiz, in
his exploration in 1866, and some future explorer may, perhaps, discover
as many more. It is quite a host of fresh-water fish which inhabits
the yellow floods of the Amazon and its tributaries. Only some of
them spread over the whole length of its course, while the mass
(according to the observations of Agassiz) are restricted to certain
localities ; every section of the stream, indeed, having its characteristic
species. A temporary transgression of their proper bounds sometimes
takes place; on the whole, however, the enormous water-net may be
divided into several regions, which differ more or less sharply in
their fauna. Some trifling differences in the vegetation, variety of
formation of the banks and of the river-bed, its depth, and especially
the greater or minor declivity, doubtless determine these restrictions.
The most constant companions of the traveller on the Amazon
are the dolphins, or botos.* From Para to the rapids of the aftluents,
and even to the smooths above them, they play around the boat.
Being mammifers, like their oceanic brothers, they are compelled ever and
anon to come to the surface, to take breath ; and they describe therefore,
in the water, a peculiar wavy line or cycloid, often leaping high into
the air and returning, blowing and puffing, to their native element.

One moonlight night, on the upper Madeira
the Jammary—our boats were surrounded by a troop of them, that
played about, snorting and splashing, and making such a noise, as
though hundreds of mermaids were pursued by bearded mermen, that
we could not get a wink of sleep all night long.

This noisy play, those sounds that seem so strange for animals of
fish shape, and their obvious passion for the society of man (they
accompany the boats sometimes for long distances, in troops of thirty
and forty), may have given rise to the extravagant tales regarding
them, which are stoutly believed by the whole population of the country,
from the half-savage Tapuyo and Mameluco to the rich Portuguese
vendeiro. ‘he botos are represented to have the property of assuming
the human shape from time to time, of walking amongst us like
other Christians, and of being especially dangerous to the fair sex.
The only tokens which might betray the monsters are their feet, which
are turned backward; but such a trifle may be easily overlooked in
the dark, which they always choose for their mischievous excursions.

* From a popular Portuguese word, bofe, jump.

it was at the mouth of

——

i ps*


7 Em

HUNTING AND FISHING IN THE PROVINCE OF AMAZON. 97

Sly mulatto and Indian women tell their credulous husbands wondrous
stories of the adventures they have had with the treacherous botos,
which took the shape of their absent spouses so completely that the
poor victims only discovered their mistake when the pseudo-husbands
took their way to the river and sprang into it with a loud snort. In
consequence of this widely-spread superstition, the dolphins are very rarely
| hunted, though i is so easy to harpoon them, and though they yield
an excellent train-oil. They multiply, therefore, within the boundaries

| assigned by nature.
Another fabulous aquatic monster, in all likelihood a near relation

“ -
THE PIRA-RUCU (SUDIS GIGAS).

of our celebrated sea-serpent, is the so-called minhocio (big worm), a
snake of such immense size that the riverines assert with all seriousness
that the river rises or falls as the monster either enters or leaves
it. It is also called mai d’agua (mother of waters), which name it
shares, though, with a sort of Brazilian Lorelei, haunting the picturesque
| fall of the Taruma, a little influent of the Rio Negro. This beautiful
maid with golden hair—whether she combs it with a golden comb,
like the German Lorelei, has not yet been ascertained—bewitches with
her loveliness any man who sets eyes on her. Madness overpowers

| his senses, and he is deprived of ability ever to find the way back to his
cottage. Therefore the narrow glen which the siren has chosen for her
I



98 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

abode, and whose umbrageous depth is uninvaded by sunbeam, is regarded
with superstitious awe, and no Tapuyo will venture to stay at nightfall
at any place within hearing of the roar of the haunted fall.

Another dreaded ghost of the forest, though it be not by far of so
lovely a shape, is the Caepéra (Céa péra, man of the forest), an ugly
old man covered with hair, of immense bodily strength, who waylays
the hunters and twists their necks. Any unusual sound in the woods is
ascribed to the caepéra, and only absolute silence and motionless cowering
under bushes and branches will, it is thought, avail to save from his
dreadful claws. Incredulous people are forced by urgent entreaties, or, if
need be, by menaces, to comply with these arrangements, in order
not to rouse the wrath of the totally invulnerable monster. If large

THE LAMANTIN, OR PEIXE-BOT (MANATUS AMERICANUS).

man-like monkeys, such as the gorilla, the chimpanzee, and the orang-
outang, were to be found in the Brazilian forests, this widely-spread
superstition would admit of easy explanation ; but even the liveliest
hunter’s fancy is not equal to so hideous an exaggeration of such poor
representatives of “our cousins” as are howling monkeys, or Barrigudos;
and the origin of the fable is certainly to be sought only in the gloomy
belief of the Indians, who fancy themselves pursued at every step by
demons and witchcraft. Moreover, every tribe has its own hunting-
customs, or rather hunting-superstitions, for here also the sons of Nimrod
are more inclined to credulity than other mortals. The Coroados of
the South will not taste the meat of the deer, lest they should lose
their rich black hair; or the protuberance on the neck of the tapir,

pee


HUNTING AND FISHING IN THE PROVINCE OF AMAZON, 99

which is the best morsel, lest they should lose the love of their wives.
In the same way they avoid the meat of the duck and of the cutia,
a very savoury rodent, lest their children should acquire big, ugly-shaped
feet and cars. He who has shot the deadly arrow must not eat of the game
if he would have steady aim and good luck for the future; and the
women also, to the evident advantage of their selfish, law-giving halves,
are prohibited from the eating of many animals,

The fishes apparently are not subject to the same objections, and every
means seems lawful for their capture : hooks, bows and arrows, casting
nets, and drag-nets, that are spread out in a wide circle and drawn
in on shallow sandbanks, sometimes filled with exceedingly rich spoil.*
At some points whole tribes will unite, as the above-mentioned Coroados
of Parana, in the operation of forcing them, by raising little stone dykes
upon and between the boulders of a current, to take a certain channel
so controlled by a plait-work of bamboo that at the upper end the water
rushes into it with considerable force, yet leaves it perfectly dry a little
farther down, whence it escapes through the interstices. As these “ parys”’
(as the contrivances are called by the Coroados) are usually fitted up at
the season of the multitudinous return of the fish after spawning up-
stream, few of the larger: ones escape their fate ; and their profusion
would be seriously impaired in streams with parys, if these were not
regularly destroyed every year by the floods.

One mode of fishing practised on the Mamoré (though it be not
very frequently) is too singular to be passed over in silence. At certain
seasons millions of small fish move up-stream in dense swarms. These
migrations, which occupy several hours, are awaited by the Moxo Indian,
who takes up a standing position in the shallow y rater, near the shore or
near a sandbank, provided only with the cdvo, a sort of conieal basket,
without bottom, carefully made of laths of a heavy palm-wood joined by
plait-work. This basket he throws at the passing fish, which he can
afterwards, at his leisure, take out by the smaller opening at the top,
provided the water is not higher than the covo itself.

Another method,—the worst of all, since it destroys both the old ones
and the spawn, the ecatable and the uncatable together, leaving generally
the greater part of them as a meal for the urubis (vultures),—can be
applied only in smaller sheets of water, in the little lagoons or pools

* The best species for eating are the Surubim, Pintado, Bagre, Tambaki, Tucunaré,
Pird-réra, Piranha, &e.

H 2



100 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

left by the retiring floods. A poisonous creeper, cipo timbd (Paullinia
pinnata, l.),* is erushed, and the sap thrown into the water, which in a
few minutes will be covered with dead fish of all sizes, the eating of
which does not seem to endanger the health. Though I think this
mode of fishing worthy only of barbarians, I should not have hesitated

once to use the poison, had one

of the plants been at hand. It

was at the Salto de Theotonio,
a= | the most considerable of the
cataracts of the Madeira, where
a rugged reef of 33 feet in
height crosses the river-bed.
A great number of pools had
been left by the receding floods
in its holes and on shore, just
about where the fish probably
had tried to pass the fall in
lateral channels, or by leaping
and bounding over the breaks
to continue, in the smooth
above, their search for an appro-
priate place to deposit their
spawn. In the largest of these
pools many hundreds of gigantic
fish had been cut off from the
main stream, perhaps wecks
before our arrival, and were
dying slowly in the warm water

of the basin, which was impreg-
nated with every variety of
putrid matter. We counted
already more than five hundred
bodies of large dead fish in every stage of decomposition, floating upon
the surface of the slimy green water, and emitting pestiferous exha-
lations. From time to time a huge surubim rose from the depth and

FISHING WITIL THE cévo.

* Besides this, there are _a few other similar plants used in the same way: Goyana-
Timbo, Piscidia Evythrina, Vurt.; Taraira-Moira, Cocculus inerme, Marr.; Conami,
Euphorbie et Ichthyothere, Maxr.

ane


ee —


| ,
:
ain
|
\}
|
|
:
|
|
|
|
: ; | J, t
i a Wn
|

ONE OF OUR MOJOS INDIANS RETURNING FROM FISHING (Mapetma).

ae


ne

ee

HUNTING AND FISHING IN THE’ PROVINCE OF AMAZON. 101

moved slowly, almost torpidly, through the thick clement. Some dozens
of black vultures (urubis) looked sharply and anxiously at us and at the
foul pond, their richly-laden table, the while sittmg rigid and motionless
on the neighbouring rocks with their wide wings opened to the evening
breeze, probably to air their feathers. They reminded us, in their im-
mobility, of the bronze cagles on the crown of some old tower. In
spite of the sickening aspect, we had the greatest difficulty to prevent our
Indians from harpooning the half-dead fish and making themselves,
seriously ill with this nauseating food, although they had, with but little
trouble, suceeeded in taking a large quantity of wholesome fish below the
fall, in the bays and ereeks of the shores, and at the mouth of a small
rivulet.

We were taken with the strange shape of the “rays,” whose broad
wings and projecting eyes are to be met, it is usually supposed, in salt
water only. We caught some specimens that measured more than three
fect from the extremity of the head to the tail, which is armed with a
horny sting, of a finger’s length. These rays were of a greyish brown,
with black spots encircling a yellow point. They are much feared by the
Indians, for their sting, which is indeed well calculated, with its double
edge and finely dentated point, to inflict excruciating wounds on the bare
foot of some bather, who may incautiously trample upon the creature, as
it lies lurking for spoil half-buried in the mud of the shallow banks.

The annexed sketch represents one of our paddlers returning from a
fishing excursion, and carrying, besides a ray and a large surubim, another
smaller fish, whose sharp curved teeth have given it the name of peixe
cachorro (dog-fish). It is not so dangerous to man as the rays or the
piranhas,* broad fishes of little more than a span’s length, which have
literally torn to pieces many a daring swimmer. Their two rows of
projecting teeth, which are sharp as needles, are the more to be dreaded,
as the terrible creatures are almost always together in hundreds, and they
throw themselves upon their victim with the rapidity of lightning, as soon
as the water has been dyed with the blood of the first’ bite, each individual
one of the dreadful snapping little jaws tearing off a piece of flesh.

Without any doubt these piranhas are a much greater obstacle to
bathing than the jacarés (crocodiles), whose victims are far less numerous
than is generally believed.

Another dangerous animal, though in a different way, is the candira,

* From pird, fish, and anha, tooth.



162 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

an almost transparent, thin little fish, of less than a finger’s length,
which penetrates with cel-like nimbleness into the orifices of the bathers
and causes many fatal accidents, according to the reports of the riverines.

So much for the scaly inhabitants of this immense water-net. I trust
I have succeeded in giving an idea of the incredible variety of their
forms, which surpass the analogous ones of our rivers both in beauty and
in number, even as these gigantic streams surpass our noblest rivers in
size.

As for hunting, it is followed much less by the half-civilised mestizo
population of the Amazon basin, although its endless forests are full of

HEAD OF SWIMMING TAPIR, PURSUED BY DOGS.

game, than it is in that of the La Plata, in the neighbouring province of
Mato Grosso.

The noblest and most generally pursued game is the anta (tapir),
that representative of the pachyderms in the New World, which, in the
Old, is found at only a few places in India. It flourishes in extraordinary
numbers, yet does not herd together in troops, on the densely wooded
shores of all the tributaries of the Amazon and La Plata. All the narrow
gorges and moist ravines, clad with rich vegetation, and the forests on the
shores of murmuring rivulets, and near the roaring cataracts of large



HUNTING AND FISHING IN THE PROVINCE OF AMAZON. 103

rivers, are sure to shelter that diminutive of the elephant. At early dawn
it leaves its quiet nook behind thorny bambusacesw, or leafy bushes, and
walks gravely to the river by deeply trodden paths of its ownengincering,
for it thoroughly enjoys a cold bath in the morning; and often, when
quickly doubling some sharp bend in the river, we surprised it sitting in
quiet majesty up to the neck in the water. It swims and dives with
astonishing agility; and it may be the sense of greater security in the
aqueous element, or it may be a longing for a refreshing bath after a
tumultuous flight, which impels it always to take the shortest cut to the
river, when pursued by the dogs. But it runs to its own destruction; for
there stands the hunter, motionless and ready for his shot, in his light
canoe, which is screened from observation by overhanging boughs. Rifle
and bow, however, are scarcely wanted. If the river is of any breadth,
the snorting and panting animal, vainly diving here and there to escape
the furiously biting and barking hounds, is soon overtaken and killed,
mostly either with a long hunting-knife, or with a pistol, by the occupant
of the nutshell. If possible, it is harpooned before receiving the fatal
blow ; else it would sink to the bottom, and the hunter would have to
await its rising again.

Only the female anta, with her young one, never flies before the dogs.
She remains courageously in her retreat, endeavouring to protect with her
own body the trembling little creature that creeps between her legs, and
vents its anxiety in shrill whistling sounds. Woe to the hardy eur that
dares to leave the semicircle of its companions, barking in these cases from
a safe distance, and to come within reach of the grim dam. Her elevated
short jaw bares some teeth that demand respect, and under her powerful
fore-legs the weak ribs of a dog would snap like thin reeds. At last,
riddled with bullets, she falls down, a victim to maternal tenderness, on
the body of her terrified offspring.

If the hunter succeeds in protecting the latter against the fury of the
pack, who are courageous enough now, and if he does not handle it too
roughly, it will become as tame as a dog, even on the second or third day
of its captivity (as I witnessed myself), and soon will abandon all thought
of returning to its native wilds. As its food (grass, pumpkins, fruits, ete.)
is easily procurable, it is not only possible but very easy to make it quite
a domestic animal.

In Curitiba, the capital of the province of Parana, a stray tapir ran
about the streets, and the negro boys used to ride upon it from morning

——

ee ll

eae



104 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

to night. A temperature of 2° or 3° below freezing point, not uncommon
there in June and July, did not appear to incommode it in the least.

Almost all the larger South American animals are easily tamed; the
wild hog, the deer, the guaty, the paca, and even the jaguar, not to speak
of the monkeys, parrots, and gallinaceous birds. Indeed, there is scarcely
a house or cottage in all the Amazon region, that does not swarm with
“Jerimbabos”” (pet animals), such as araras, periquitos, marianitas,
jacamins, jacutingas, mutuns, tucanoes, cutias, pacas, monkeys, ete. ; which
sometimes are of the most troublesome and ridiculous tameness. The
half-caste ladies especially are fond of their favourites, and often would
not part with them for the world. Even the giboia (a sort of American
boa-constrictor) is often set free in the houses, to kill rats, mice, and other
vermin, of which there is no lack anywhere. Small lizards, bats and
enormous spiders are the most harmless of them; scorpions and lacraias,
whose sting is said to be exceedingly painful, being no rare guests,
especially in old houses.

Accidents from poisonous snakes are not so frequent as is generally
supposed. The bite of the different species of jararacas (Bothrops jar-
araca) and of coral-snakes will produce serious nflammations ; but the
patient usually escapes if properly attended to; while the rattlesnake of
the campos (Crotalus horridus) and the surucucu (Lachesis mutus) are said
to cause certain death. Yet I once saw a negro, at Barbacena in the
province of Minas, who escaped with only a stiff leg after having been
bitten by a rattlesnake.

All the animals of these forests, birds included (with the single
exception of the jaguar), eat clay* with great voracity, and may
be found peacefully congregated, sometimes in great numbers, at
favourably situated spots, on steep broken banks, for instance, whose
reddish yellow walls often show distinct traces of the teeth of a great
many species. On moonlight nights particularly, when the whole
animal world is awake and more restless than usual, these ‘ barreiros”
(clay-pits), easily visible from the river, are excellent places for lying in
ambush for all kinds of game; and, if he be lucky, the hunter may kill

* Many, especially children, in these countries share the same morbid craving ;
which often reaches such a degree that not even the certainty of the most painfully
miserable death awaiting them can cure them of it. As a desperate expedient, negro
slaves sometimes are forced to wear iron masks, which are only taken off during the
ineals, when the overseer is by.




CARIPUNA INDIANS WITH TAPIR (Maverra).

(Oxcumps, Bromenias, AND Ferns).



HUNTING-AND FISHING IN THE PROVINCE OF AMAZON, 105

even a spotted or black jaguar, in quest, not of the clay, but, like the
hunter himself, of deer or wild hogs, which are an easy spoil for
its long fangs and powerful paws. ‘Tapirs, that is full-grown ones, do
not fall victims so easily. These pachyderms—thanks to their skin of
a finger’s thickness—dash so swiftly through the shrubs and bushes,
with a weight that carries everything resistlessly before them, that,
in the first dense thicket of thorns and lianas, they violently disengage
themselves of their terrible riders, who tightly clasp them round their
necks, before the jaguar’s powerful clutches penetrate below their stout
skin.

In the endless virgin forests on the shores of the Parana, before
us unvisited by European for two hundred years at least, our hunters
shot, at the mouth of the Ivahy, an old tapir, which had evidently
had a hard struggle with its sleek enemy. It had one eye only, and
its broad back showed deep traces of the jaguar’s claws. And thus
this poor patriarch of the woods, who had escaped the tooth of the
tiger, at last fell a victim to the bullet of one of our half-caste
Indians.

The meat of the tapir is excellent, tasting much like beef. The
fat hunch on its neck, covered with long black bristles, is a delicacy
which would do honour to the table of a Lucullus; and equally esteemed
are its short trunk, and the fect, which yield, when boiled, a rich
jelly. The Indians and mestizoes usually prepare the head in the
following manner; which also serves for whole hogs and other game.
A number of pebbles, of the size of one’s fist, or larger, are thoro oughly
heated in the fire, and then carefully placed in a hole prepared for
their reception, two or three feet deep. The tapir’s head (or the peccari),
wrapped in banana or heliconia leaves, is laid thereon; another layer
of glowing hot stones, together with more leaves, is put over them, and
the hole filled up with earth, At the end of six or eight hours a
supply of the best and juiciest roast meat will thus be ready.

Besides the tapir, two species of wild hog, and several kinds of
deer, are especially appreciated. Among the latter is an exceedingly
pretty one, scarcely three spans high. Stags (and very powerful ones
too), whose antlers are much thicker in proportion, and taper much more
sharply than those of the European species, are found only in the campos

or prairies,
Of the wild hogs, even the larger variety is considerably smaller



106 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

and weaker than the European class; and, though they are together
by hundreds, and the Brazilian hunters generally bring them down at
close quarters, we never heard of any damage occasioned by them,
beyond badly wounding some dogs. In the middle of the back, these
animals have a sort of gland, filled with a greasy, strongly scented
substance, reminding one of musk, which, when irritated or hardly
pursued by the dogs, they emit through a small opening. As soon as
the peccari is killed, it is the hunter’s first care to see that this gland
is cut out, lest its foul odour should communicate itself to the meat,
and so render it uneatable.*

The monkeys, the queerest and nimblest of all the inhabitants of
the woods, who with infinite agility swing themselves, in numerous
troops, from bough to bough, are often hunted by the Brazilians ;
but I should not advise a European to partake of the sport. Their
piteous cries, if they be not killed on the spot, their desperate, almost
human gestures, and their excited examination of the bleeding wound,
will more than suffice to spoil the pleasure of the day for any one of
sensitive feelings.

Gallinaceous birds, and parrots in endless variety, are found every-
where ; yet the latter, especially the long-tailed macaws, are exceedingly
shy and very difficult to shoot, while of the former twenty or thirty
together may sometimes be seen in the above-mentioned barreiros or
clay-pits. Amongst them the jacus (Penelope cristata) and jacutingas
(Penelope jacutinga), of the size of our tame fowls, and the jacamins
(Psophia crepitans, P. ochroptera, P. leucoptera), somewhat larger, are
considered excellent eating.t When to all these we add the multitude
of smaller quadrupeds, such as cutias (Dasyprocta fuliginosa and D.
agutt); coatys (Nasua socialis and NV. solitaria) ; pacas ( Coelogenys Paca);
and large flocks of ducks, mutuns (Crax), herons and water-fowl, the

* The capivara (water-hog), a rodent of the shape of the Guinea-pig, but of the size
of our tame pig, has a similar gland on the back of its nose, the contents of which smell
even worse, if that be possible; and for this reason the capivdra is seldom hunted.

+ A highly prized because rare bird is the anhuma, or alicorne (Palamedea cornuta),
whose strange-sounding cry is said to denote a change of weather. It has a horny
protuberance on the head of 3 to 4 inches length, which the Tapuyos believe to
be a strong talisman. We saw at Mandos a little silver chain, belonging to an old
half-caste woman, from which were suspended, besides the horn of the anhuma, the
formidable claws of an anteater (Zamandua bandeira), a tooth of a jaguar, and bristles of
different animals, set in silver; and I really believe the old squaw would not have
parted with her treasure for all the wealth of California.

ape


HUNTING AND FISHING IN THE PROVINCE OF AMAZON. 107

most exacting son of Nimrod will admit that the forests and prairies
of Brazil have attractions enough, though the hippopotami, elephants
and giraffes of Africa are not found here ; and that a ramble on the
Amazon or the Parana, with a good double-barrelled gun, fishing-tackle,
and a harpoon, amply compensates for the trouble, even did we omit
from the account the aspect of a vegetation of unrivalled magnificence.



CHAPTER V.

THE VEGETATION OF THE VIRGIN-FOREST OF THE AMAZON AND THE
MADEIRA.

Changes and New Formations.—
Terras Cahidas.—Orchids and
Bromeliz. —Lianas.—Figueiras.
— Palms.—The Caoutchoue.—
The Cacéo.—Drugs.—Resins.—
The Urary.—The Quinquina.—
The Guarand.—The Coca.

yVERYWHERE the decom-
posing organisms — serve
as bases for new _for-
mations. No particle,
however small, is ever lost
in the great household of
Nature; but nowhere is
her restless activity so con-
spicuous as in the tropics,
where the succession of
vegetable decay and life is
so much more rapid than
it is in colder climes; and
which will strike the re-
flecting student more especially in the wide, forest-clad valleys of
tropical America, and on the Amazon and its affluents.

On the heights of the Cordillera, the process is already at work.
The waste of the mountain-slopes, broken off by rills and_ torrents,
and carried by them into the main river, slowly drifts down stream
in the form of gravel-banks, until, scattered and rent asunder in a
thousand ways, it finally takes permanent form as light green islands,
which are soon covered and protected with a dense coat of vegetation.

225s


THE VEGETATION OF THE VIRGIN-FOREST. 109

As every zone of geologic formation in the extensive valley adds
its tribute, these banks are a kind of mineralogical collection, which
shows samples of all the rocks on the river-banks; with the ex-
ception, perhaps, of light pumice-stone, the produce of the voleanves
of the Andes, which drifts down stream in large pieces, and is highly
prized by the Tapuia population (on the lower course) for sharpening
and cleaning their weapons and tools. Even when not picked up
by hunter or fisher, it is not lost. It will be arrested by some
snag or projection of the shore, it will so get embedded in the
newly-forming sediment, and thousands of years hence its silicic acid
will afford the necessary material for
the hard glassy bark of a bambusacea,
or the sharp edge of a reed. When
the currents are not strong enough to
moye the larger banks, they at least
carry sand and carth with them, and
deposit them as shoals or new alluvion
at less exposed spots.* But there is
no stability in the liquid element,
with its periodic rise and fall, and
the restless working of the busy waves.
Diverted by the obstructing shoal, the
river eats away the banks originally
formed in the sea basin; and the
sharper the bend the quicker the

demolition. Then begins to form a

TRANSVERSE SECTION OF A BREAKING
SHORE, CALLED TERRAS OAIIDAS.

scrpentine, whose vagrant course gets
more and more pronounced by the
concave bank breaking down and forming new deposits on the convex
one; until, at last, an extraordinary flood breaks through the narrow
isthmus and opens up a straighter bed for the river, which soon
resumes its playful operations afresh.t The convex bank, therefore,

* The laws of these movements, the sediments, &c., are of course the same in
all climes ; but in old Europe all the larger rivers are so controlled, regulated, and
canalized, narrowed by dykes and other restraining appliances, that this restless
power, the wonderful perpetuum mobile of a large river, must be entirely imperceptible,
at least to non-professional observers.

+ We found places on the Mamoré where three several beds of different periods



110 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

always consists of igapé, the newest sediment; while the opposite
one may be vargem, or terra-firma.
Trees of soft wood, most of them with white bark and leght

OUR TENT UNDER THE PALMS.—PREPARATIONS FOR TAKING THE SUN’S ALTITUDE (MADEIRA).

green foliage, like the embattba (Cecropia), and the siphonia; and
herbaceous plants, broad-leayed heliconias and reeds, find the fittest

could easily be distinguished, the oldest of which formed a lakelet connected with
the river only by a narrow channel. Natural corrections of the sharpest curves by
the breaking through of the narrowest point of the isthmus are not rare.

tse




A GIANT OF THE FOREST.

BUTTRESSED TREE.

A

“45 5 >*


j-

THE VEGETATION OF THE VIRGIN-FOREST. i1i

nurture in the light soil of the igapé, while thorny murti-muris and
javary-palms, cacdo, various:-myrtacéw, and fig-trees prefer the vargem ;
which is flooded for only a‘short.time of the: year... The ‘noble
castanheira (Bertholletia excelsa), the cedar, and all the’ other splendid
timbers’ of the’ tropics, thrive on the terra-firma only, above flood-level,
m the.“ drift” of Agassiz. : i et4 $

The undermined concave shores are sometimes a serious danger to
the passing barque, as “even the slight ripple of a canoe is sufficient
to bring down the loosely overhanging earth, often covered with gigantic
trunks. These concave sides, with their fallen trees, and their clusters of
sinking javary-palms, supported sometimes by only a tangled network
of tough lianas, give to the scenery that peculiar character of primeval
wildness, which is so charming to foreigners.

When one has climbed up the steep shore, often forming huge
terrace-like elevations, and has safely passed through a labyrinth of
interwoven roots and creepers into the interior of the forest, which is
getting freer from underwood at some distance from the river, he is
oppressed with the sensation of awe and wonder felt by man on entering
one of-the venerable edifices of antiquity.

A mysterious twilight encompasses us, which serves to intensify
the radiance of the occasional sunbeam, as it falls on a glossy palm-leaf,
or on a large bunch of purple orchid-fiowers. Splendid trunks, some
of them from 20 to 30 feet in diameter, rise like so many pillars
supporting the dense green vault of foliage; and every variety of
tall, graceful palms, spare and bushy, and bearing heavy berries of
bright yellow or red, struggle to catch a glimpse of the light, from
which they are shut out by the neighbouring giants; of which the
figueira (or wild fig-tree) is one of the most striking, in the dimensions
of its crown ,and stem, and in the strange shape of its roots, which
project like huge outworks. These seem to grow in all directions,
forming props, stays, and cross-bars wherever they are wanted, just
as-if the whole were a. soft. plastic mass, the sole purpose of which
was to supply, with a minimum of material, as much stability as
possible to the trunk; whose wood is of extreme softness and whose
roots are not deep.* The pachiuba-palm (Jriartea exorhiza) and some

* Such are their plasticity and pliancy that a young figueira, taken out and
planted with the branches reversed, will take root in this position, its former roots
changing into a fresh, oddly-formed but leafy crown. A yet more striking instance



112 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

species of cecropie, exhibit other extravagances in their roots. They
appear as if standing on stilts, the real trunks only beginning at 8
or 10 feet above ground. But, more than all, it is the profusion
of orchids and bromelie that excites our admiration. These bright
children of the tropies envelop with dense foliage as well the fallen
and mouldering trunks as those yet upstanding in full vigour and

GROTESQUE SHAPE OF A SPECIES OF FICUS.

bloom, thus forming hanging gardens of astounding magnificence, which
reveal leaves and flowers of the most irregular shapes and colours.

of the vitality of a plant I witnessed in the province of Paran4é. Ina narrow gorge
some workmen had built a small log-house of the short trunks of the there abounding
tree-ferns. The horizontally placed stems, deprived of their fronds, had grown splendid
fresh leaves on both the upper and the lower ends. I must add, it is true, that the site
was exceedingly moist and the rainy season, besides, at its height.

aus


THE VEGETATION OF THE VIRGIN-FOREST. 113

Fiverywhere, on the branches, and on the ground, and even from out
the fissures of the bare rock, light ferns and rich moss spring up and
clothe the decaying trunks with fresh green. Of mosses and ferns,
especially tree-ferns, we found a greater exuberance and a larger
variety, in species as well as in individuals, in the Southern provinces
of the empire, Sao Paulo and Parané;* but for splendid palms and
gigantic dicotyledons, the North is decidedly the richer of the two.t
Without the aid of the pencil it is, indeed, scarcely possible to give
an adequate idea of the magnificence of this vegetation; especially
of the manner in which the different forms are grouped. We may see,
it is true, in our own hothouses, well-trimmed palms, beautiful orchids
with their abnormal blossoms, and aroidew with their bright, sappy,
sometimes regularly perforated, leaves ; but how different is this from
the virgin-forest, wherein Nature, undisturbed by man, has created
her own prodigies, and where no narrow pots separate her children
from the maternal soil, and where no dim roof of glass intervenes
between them and the blue ether! Nor, in our carefully tended
hothouses, is the eye ever gratified with such agreeable contrasts as
are afforded by the silver-grey and rust-brown tints of the decayed
leaf of the palm or the fern-tree, or the black bark of the rotting
trunk, with the blazing scarlet of some heliconia blossom. How
difficult it must be to give to every plant, especially to orchids, the
exact quantity of light, warmth and moisture it requires, can be
understood only by those who have seen clusters of them hidden in
the deep shade of the tree-crowns, while others are exposed to the

* In the forests of the province of Parand4, where the Araucaria Brasiliensis and
palms and tree-ferns frequently form dense boscages, and where the fernlike zamiz
with their strangely ornamented bark, whose fossil predecessors we have probably to
seek in the so-called stigmario, are found everywhere on the shores of little rivulets,
we may see a miniature living copy of that antediluvian vegetation whose remains
we encounter in our coal-mines. On the shores of these rivers, especially at the
mouths of affluents, the formation of charcoal still goes on, though on a minor scale ;
the immense heaps of leaves and branches being covered by the high floods with
sand and mud.

+ Excellent timber for building purposes and cabinet-work, surpassing our best oak
in solidity, are (besides several canella and laurus species) Jacaranda piranga
(Macherium farmum), Jacarandi-tan (Macherium scleroxylon), Jacarandi-una (Dalbergia
nigra), Palisander (corrupted from Palo santo), Ipé (Lecoma eurialis), Sucupira (Bowdichia),
Vinhatico (Ohrysophyllum vinhatico), Paroba (Aspidosperma), Barauna (AHelanoxylon
Bratna), Sapucaia (Lecythis grandiflora), Massaranduba (Lucwma procera), Cedro ( Cedrela
Brasiliensis), Tapinhoam (Sylvia navalium), Muira piranga ( Casalpinia echinata), Angelim
rosa ( Peralthea erythrinafohia).



1i4 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

scorching rays of the sun in the vicinity of a river or in some
clearer part of the forest; some species thriving on the bare rock
almost, and others clinging fast with their white rootlets to the moist
rotting bark of a tree.

As for the temperature in the interior of the forests, it is generally
lower by several degrees than on the river, or (of course) on the
glowing sandbanks, or the slabs of rock, as in the region of the
rapids, for instance, where the thermometer rises to 104° Fahr. even
in the shade of a large open tent. The severity of this heat is
felt the more acutely that, in the early hours of the morning, the
aur cools to 68°, and sometimes even to 57°.* Though the difference

of level between the mouth

the Rio Negro is only 69
fect im a distance of more
than 1,000 miles, and 874
feet till above the rapids
of the Madeira (the climate
remaining, therefore, much
the same in spite of the
higher latitude of the latter),
there is yet a considerable

difference observable between

the varieties and species of
USUAL STRUCTURE OF PALM-ROOTS ; STILTS OF THE palins, for instance, within
PAXIUBA, the above-mentioned boun-

daries. Not to speak of the

coco da Bahia (the real coco-palm),t that thrives only where the
salt atmosphere of the sea reaches it, the noble mauritia, as well
as the pretty assai-palms, are much rarer on the higher course of
the Amazon than on the lower; while a small slender palm, with

bifurcated fan, whose name I unfortunately could not learn, is found

* The sensation of cold at this latter temperature was about the same for us as at
1° or 2° under freezing-point in Europe ; and, with even my warm cloak on, I was
scarcely able to hold the pencil sometimes.

+ In the interior of Brazil, in the province of Minas, now and then a coco-palm or
two are to be found in front of the house of some fazendeiro (landowner); but they
are planted there, and to thrive require to be regularly irrigated with salt water.

of the Amazon and that of




— Se
et ete ena ae

; ) S. S MA LIRA
PALM N THE ANK
\ N
I AVAL
GR

“os



READ isin

‘ens

or

BAN KS

eS

rN

PATNI,

eee NS RTD

—

THE VEGETATION OF THE VIRGIN-FOREST. 115

only near the rapids of the Madeira. Other varieties ‘of palm, like
the muri-muri, and the creeping jacitara (Desmoncus), which grows
to the length of 100 feet, while it does not exceed a finger in width,
are found everywhere, and are not peculiar to any part of the river.

Though real groves of palms are not found on the Madeira and the
Amazon, at least not on the extensive scale of the coco-palm woods
on. the coast near Pernambuco, or of the palmito groves (Luterpe oleracea)
in Minas Geraes, Sio Paulo and Parand, we often found groups of
hundreds of palms, whose noble shafts and light feathery leaves imparted
an enhanced charm to the spectacle of white-foaming cataracts, dark
reefs,, and islets glowing in the light of the setting sun. Of the
perfection exhibited by Nature in the
most trifling details, the shapes of the
cross-sections of the ribs of different
palm-leaves give an interesting ex-
ample. .These ribs take a more or
less curved shape according to their
weight ; and, as the fibres themselves

more easily resist, as it appears,

bruising and pressing than tearing, the
upper part of the cross-section is
much more developed than the under
one; the glassy silicious skin being,
besides, much thicker below than above,
and more pronounced at the sides, just

as is the case with the top and bottom
plates of tubular wrought-iron girders.

y 5 5 DIFFERENT TRANSVERSE CUTS OF
So perfect is the adjustment that the DRE

ribs of the uauassi-palm (No. 1), whose

stiff leaves, standing vertically at the end like those of all the Attalea
species, present a large surface to the wind, show a broader cross-section 5
which imparts greater lateral stiffness. No. 2 does not require this, as the
feathery leaves of the muri-murtt are horizontally placed, and therefore
suffer less from the wind. ‘The ribs of the fan-palm, No..3, have a
roundish shape, as from the peculiar form of their leaves they are more
exposed to torsion. As all these ribs, besides, are filled with a soft
marrow, and as the hardest fibres are placed on the surface, it is

evident that, if the problem had been to construct a rib of the greatest
12



116 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

power of resistance with the least expenditure of means, it could not
have been solved more successfully.

Another feature of Amazonian vegetation, even more striking than
its noble palms, is the urania, called banana sororoca (wild banana) by
the aborigines on account of likeness to those chief representatives of
the Musacez. Its broad fan of mighty emerald-green leaves, mounted
on a slender palmlike shaft from 6 to 8 feet in height, forcibly
reminds the European of the fans of peacock feathers carried in the
grand processions of the successor of St. Peter. In the foreground
of the sketch representing our first mecting with the Caripunas, may
be seen a urania or strelitzia, whose light-green leaves were set off by
the dark background of the forest.

But of far greater importance to the half-civilised riverines than
either palms or orchids, for whose beauties they have no eye, are the
cacdo and the caoutchoue-tree (Siphonia elastica), products of the virgin-
forest, essential to the future prosperity of the whole country.

Although India contributes to the supply of caoutchoue,* the
precious resin which is transformed into a thousand different shapes
every year in the factories of Europe and North America, and sent
to the ends of the earth, it cannot compete with Brazil, which takes
the first place among the rubber-producing countries, in respect as
well of the vastness of its export of the material as of its superior
quality.

On the shores of the Amazon its production, it is true, has already
been diminished by unreasonable treatment of the trees; the idea of
replacing the old ones by young saplings never having presented itself,
apparently, to the mind of the indolent population; but the seringaes,
or woods of rubber-trees, on the banks of the Madeira, the Puris,
and other tributaries of the main river, still continue to furnish
extraordinary quantities of it. The province of Amazon alone exports
more than 50,000 arrobas (1,600,000 Ibs.) yearly ; while the total of
the exports of the whole basin slightly exceeds 400,000 arrobas, or
12,800,000 Ibs. per annum.

Even more remarkable than these figures is the fact that, with

* The word caoutchouc is of Indian origin ; while seringa and borracha (of which
the former signifies syringe or squirt, and the latter tube) are names given to the same
material by the Portuguese, who were first familiarised by the Indians with the rubber,
in the shape of tubes which they used as squirts.

P= ty

tae


INDIA-RUBBER MANUFACTURE ON THE BANKS OF THE MADEIRA.





THE VEGETATION OF THE VIRGIN-FOREST. 117

the quantity, the value of the exported ware has steadily risen within
the last years, as may be seen by the following statement :—

In 1865 were exported 256,967 arrobas, worth 3,969,036 milreis.

, 1866 if 291,091, » 6,521,853

,, 1867 ‘7 301,170 _,, » 5,987,441,

,, 1868 i 384,975, », 8,003,550,
1869 J 365,354 »» -9,698,721*

”

This increase of price, keeping pace with the increase of exportation,
certainly proves that the long list of articles of every kind, for whose
fabrication the caoutchouc is wanted, from the old goloshes first made
by the Indians themselves to the protecting coats of the telegraph
wires, has not yet been exhausted, or, at least, that most of them
are in increased requisition.

Unfortunately there has not been until now the slightest attempt
made to cultivate this useful tree; and all the caoutchoue exported
from Para is still obtained from the original seringa groves. The trees of
course suffer, as they naturally would under the best of treatment, from
the repeated tapping and drawing-off of their sap, and the rubber collectors,
therefore, must look about for new groves of the tree in the unexplored
valleys of the more distant interior.

The planting of the Stphonia elastica would be a more profitable
investment, as it yields the precious milk in the comparatively short
space of twenty or twenty-five years; but, under the combined influence
of the indolence of the mestizoes and the shortsightedness of the
Government, measures to that end will be adopted and carried into
effect only when the rubber exportation shall have diminished with
the destruction of the trees, and when European and North American
manufacturers shall have found out a more or less appropriate substitute
for the too costly resin.

* The total value of the exports of Paré in 1869 was 12,897,598 milreis, somewhat
more than £1,000,000 sterling. The distribution over the different countries was as
follows :—

The United States 5,410,015 milreis.
England - 4,521,520
France. . . . . 1,761,178

The chief articles so exported were :—

Rubber, worth 9,608,721 milveis.
Cacao, » 1,271,488
Raw hide, _,, 413,220
Brazil nuts, ,, 348,474
Uruect, - 133,936

”

?

”

”

ed

?

Portugal . 473,300 milreis.
Germany. . .. . 454,643  ,,
The Brazilian Provinces 276,908 __,,

Fish glue, worth 107,503 milreis.
Copaiva oil, ,, 101,745 _,,
Stag’s hide, ,, 98,448
Sundries, » 124,088  ,,



118 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

Near the Praia pe TamanpuA we acquainted ourselyes with all’
the particulars respecting the collection and preparation of the caout-.

choue, at the. cottage of a Bolivian seringueiro, Don Domingo Leigue.
As I have already stated, the Siphonia grows, or at least thrives, only
on a soil wherein its stem is annually submerged by the floods to the
height of 5 feet or more. The best ground for it, therefore, is the
igapd, the lowest and most recent deposit of the river; and there, in
the immediate vicinity of the serigaes, may be seen the low thatches
of the gatherers’ huts, wretched hovels mostly, rendered tenantable
during the inundations by the device of raising the floors on wooden
piles of 7 feet height, im which the canoe, the seringuciro’s indis-
pensable horse, also finds a protected harbour. Unenviable truly must
be the life of the happy proprietor, who has nothing to do in the
seringal during the wet season, and who then has ample leisure to
caleulate exactly the intervals between his fits of ague, and to let
himself be devoured by carapanas, piums, motticas, and mucuims; under
which euphonious names are known some of the most terrible of insect
pests.

Narrow paths lead from the cottage, through the dense underwood,
to each separate tree; and, as soon as the dry season sets in, the
inmate of the palace just described betakes himself with his hatchet
into the seringal, to cut little holes in the bark. The milk-white sap
immediately begins to exude into pieces of bamboo tied below, over
little clay cups set under the gashes to prevent their trickling down
the stems. The collector travels thus from trunk to trunk; and, to
facilitate operations, on his return visit he pours the contents of the
bamboos into a large calabash provided with liana straps, which he
empties at home into one of those large turtle-shells so auxiliary to
housckeeping in these regions, serving as ‘they do for troughs,
basins, &e. :

Without any delay he sets about the smoking process, as the
resinous parts will separate after a while, and the. quality of the
rubber so become inferior. An earthen jar, without bottom and with
a narrow neck, is set by way of chimney over a fire of dry urucury,
or uauassi palm-nuts,* whose smoke alone, strange to say, has the
effect of instantly coagulating the caoutchoue sap, which, in this state,

* Two species of détalea, the latter with gigantic leaves.

=






THE VEGETATION OF THE VIRGIN-FOREST. 119

greatly resembles rich cow’s-milk. The workman, sitting beside this
‘“‘chimney,” through which roll dense clouds of a smothering white
smoke, from a small calabash pours a little of the milk on a sort of
light wooden shovel, always careful, by proper management of the latter,
to distribute it evenly over the surface. Thrusting the shovel into the
thick smoke over the opening of the jar, he turns it several times to

BIFURCATED PALM-LEAP.

and fro with great rapidity, when the milk is seen to consolidate and
to take a greyish-yellow tinge.

Thus he puts layer upon layer, until at last the caoutchouc on
both sides of the wood has reached about an inch in_ thickness,
when he thinks the “plancha” ready. Cutting it on one side, he
takes it off the shovel and suspends it in the sun to dry, as there
is always some water between the several layers, which should, if



120 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

possible, evaporate. A good workman is thus able to prepare 5 or
6 Ibs. of solid seringa in an hour. The plancha, from its initial colour
of a clear silver-grey, turns shortly into a yellow, and finally becomes
the well-known dark brown of the rubber, such as it is exported.

The more uniform, the denser and freer of bubbles the whole mass
is found to be, the better is its quality and the higher the price it
fetches. Almost double the value is obtained for the first-rate article
over that of the most inferior quality, the so-called sernamby or cabeca
de negro (negro’s head); which is nothing but the drops collected at
the foot of the trees, with the remains of the milk scraped out of
the bottoms of the calabashes. The rubber of India is. said to be
much like this sernamby, and, like it, to be mixed with sand and small
pieces of bark. By way of testing the quality, every plancha is cut
through again at Para; by which means discovery is made, not only
of the bubbles, but also of any adulteration that might be effected with
the milk of the mangaba, that fine plant with dark glossy leaves, now
found so often in European saloons under the erroneous name of
rubber-plant.

Of the milk of the mangaba also a sort of spurious caoutchouc is
made, that has, however, so little of the elasticity and toughness of
the genuine article that it has as yet acquired no value in commerce.
But, for certain purposes, for making hardened caoutchoue for instance,
the mangaba sap would certainly serve quite as well; and, as it can
be obtained at a much lower price than the true seringa, it would be
well worth the while of European or North American firms to send
agents to the Amazon, to establish depéts for the manufacture of the
mangaba resin on the spot, more especially as no such enterprise is to
be expected from the selfish anxiety of the merchants at Para. It would
amply remunerate commercial houses in this way of business to have
local stores and representatives at the chief stations on the Amazon, as
Manaos, Santarem, &c., more especially as the navigation of the river is
now opened to the ships of all nations, and as schooners and brigs can
easily be towed up by steam-tugs. Hitherto most of the goods have
been transported by expeditious steamers at very high rates; the
conveyance of an arroba of caoutchoue (32 lbs.) from Mandos to Para,
for example, costing 500 reis (about 1 shilling), whereas by tugs and
barques it could be easily effected for 300 reis, the passage taking
sixteen days instead of seven. Moreover, this direct communication

==


THE VEGETATION OF THE VIRGIN-FOREST. 121

between consumers and producers would tend at the same time to
destroy, at least in great measure, the vampire-like dominion exercised
by a few landowners and other influential persons over the poorer rubber
collectors, who have not established for themselves a correspondence
with Pard. These monopolists, for the most part majors and colonels
of the National Guard, being able, by virtue of their positions, to bring
most considerable influence to bear on the elections of deputies, are
caressed by the Government; and, employing with impunity all manner
of vexations, they compel the poorer class of collectors to sell to them
the fruits of their industry at half-price ; to be content with 14 milreis
per arroba (about 28 shillings for 32 Ibs.), while they themselves dispose

BOUGH OF 'LITE SIPHONIA ELASTICA (caourcioUc TREE).

of it for 36 milreis at Para. To make matters worse, even this wretched
price being scarcely ever paid in ready money, but rather in goods
and provisions charged at thrice their value, it is not to be wondered
at that the poor seringa collector, though he works a gold-mine (so to
speak), at the end of the year owes more than he can discharge ; and
from this cleverly designed bondage he is never able to liberate himself.
Thus disheartened, these poor creatures, mostly ignorant mestizoes and
mulattoes, become even more inconsiderate and frivolous than Nature has
made them ; and, out of the temptingly arranged stores of their “ pro-



122 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

tectors,” they are sure to select the most ridiculous gewgaws, such as
high riding-boots, gold watches, and silk jackets, and silk umbrellas
for their brown ladies, although they know that the useless articles
will cost them a year or more’s hard labour.

In this condition of things, it will be readily understood that no
thought has been given to improving the preparation of the caoutchouc,
either by the use of alum for its solidification, in place of the weary
process of smoking it with palm-nuts, which are not always to be
had, or by the mixture of ammoniac—a still more important discovery
—by which the milk may be kept liquid, and thus would become
transportable in casks. And equally evident is it that only with a
total change of their commercial conditions, by the establishment of new
lines of steamers, by the construction of railways, and by the opening
of branches of European firms, can these highly favoured countries be
divorced from the errors of their old routine, and led into other and
more prosperous ways. ‘These happy changes effected, the cacao plant
also, which grows luxuriantly over an immense range, may be turned
to good aceount, more especially as the preparation of it for export
is so simple, the seeds being only dried in the sun. There is also
a4 coarse sort of chocolate made of it, but it spoils easily. It still
continues to be planted on a small scale on the Amazon and near the
mouths of some of its tributaries, and its quality is said to be first-rate ;
but, as it was often sold mixed with the inferior seeds of the wild
cacao, its purchasers fell off.

This wild cacao, with its large lancet-shaped hanging leaves, and its
eucumber-like fruit springing directly from the stem, is one of the
characteristic features of the virgem, on which it often forms dense
thickets, which are all the more impenetrable that the boughs—exhibiting
frequently at the same time the small reddish flowers and the ripe golden
fruit, in which the seeds lie embedded in a sweet white marrow—bend to

the ground and there take root again.

But the india-rubber and the cacdo are not the only treasures worth
collecting in these forests. Even now the export of the Para nuts,
the fruit of the Bertholletia excelsa, yields an annual revenue of 200,000
dollars ; and the copaiba oil and the uruct, the seeds of the DBizra
Orellana, used for dyeing, about 100,000 dollars. These sums seem
small enough, it is true, but there are perhaps a hundred times those
values of the rich-flavoured nuts rotting unheeded in the forests, and

we



THE VEGETATION OF THE VIRGIN-FOREST. 123

above a score of other rich oily seeds, at present collected only for the
use of the natives, not to mention several resins which yield the finest
varnishes, plants giving the most brilliant hues, and others with fibres
that would serve not only for the finest weavings, but also for the
strongest ropes; besides about forty of the most indispensable drugs,
all which might become most valuable articles of export.

For the benefit of readers interested in botany, I subjoin a list of
the most important of these plants, with both their Indian and their
Latin names, when I could find them out. It is taken partly from
V. Martius’s works, and partly from my own notes.

OIns sERvING For Cooxine, Licntine, Soars, &c.*

Pataua (Oenocarpus pataua. J/art.)
Caiauhé (Elaeis melanococca.t Gaertn.) Castanheira (Bertholletia excelsa. Z/umb.)
Bacaba (Oenocarpus bacéiba. art.) \(Lecythis ollaria. Velloso.)

Sapucaia
Tucuman (Astrocaryum tucuma. Jart.)| ** I \(Lecythis grandiflora. Anbl.)

Assai (Euterpe edulis. art.) a Andiroba (Xylocarpus caropa. Spreng.)
Maraja (Bactris marajé. Aart.) x Pequia (Carica butyrosum. Mart.)
lupaty (Raphia taedigera. Mart.) Uauet (Monopteryx uauct. Jfart.)
Ubusst (Manicaria saccifera. Jfart.) Ucutba (Myristica sebifera. Sw.)

Inajé (Maximiliana regia. fart.)

Oporovs OILs,

Cujumary (Ocotea cujumary. art.) Puchury (Nectandra puchury. ees and
Cumari (Dipteryx odorata. 7.) (Tonga- | Mart.)
bean. ) Tamaquaré (Laurinea).

Uixi-puecd (Myristica).

Resins, Gums, and Minx-sars.

Carnatba (Copernicia cerifera. fart.) Cajueiro (Anacardium occidentale. L.)
Angico (Acacia angico. A/art.) Ucuttba (Myristica Surinamensis. J/art.)
Almecega (Icica icicariba), the so-called Cipo Macaco ( ? )
sham Hlemi. Mururé (? )
Jatahy, Jatobi (Hlymenaea Martianna), Maporonima ( ? )
the so-called Animé resin. Pariry (? )
Sorva (Colophora utilis. Jfart.) Massaranduba (Lucuma procera), Milk
Mangaba (Hancornia BRE} Substitutes or Cow-tree, with a resin much like
ciosa) | for india- gutta-percha.
Monpiqueira ( ? ) ) rubber.

* Though the ricinus, which also gives an excellent lamp-oil, does not grow wild
in Brazil, it yields profuse crops with scarcely any trouble, and might become another
money-producing article.

+ Of the same family as Elacts Guineensis (Jacq.), the Guinea oil-palm, or dendé,
whose thick, orange-coloured oil, made of the outer fleshy pulp of the nut, gives that
peculiar flavour to the highly peppered national dishes of Bahia, which, from the
kitchens of the black slaves, have found their way to the tables of their masters.

t{ As the real coco-nut tree only thrives near the seashore, it cannot well be



124 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

Dyeine Srurrs.*

Uruct (Bixa Orellana. J.)} | Baracutidra (? )
Urucurana (Bixa urucurana. JV.) Tatajuba (Maclura ? )
Ucutba (Myristica Surinamensis. Jart.) Muiratinga ( ? )
Carajuri (Bignonia chica. wb.) Guariuba (Maclura ? )

THE MOSr IMPORTANT OF THE Mepictnan PLANts.

Ipecacuanha (Cephaélis ipecacuanha. Sassafraz (Ocotea amara. fart.)

Tussae and Richard. ) Massarandiba (Lucuma procera).
Salsaparilha (Smilax Syphilitica. art.) Marupa (Quassia simaruba. J.)
Copaiba (Copaifera, Jacquini. Desf.) Puchury (Nectandra puchury. Nees and
Jurubéba (Solanum paniculatum. .) Mart.)

Anabi (Potalia resinifera. fart.) Jiquitibé, Turury (Curatari legalis).
Uixi (Myristica platysperma. Mart.) Caferana (? ), substitute for quinquina.
Canjerana (Trichilia canjerana. Mart.) Juréma (Acacia jurema. art.)
Jacaréuba (Calophyllum  Brasiliense. Caaopia (Vismia micrantha and Vismia

Mart.) laccifera. fart.)

Coajinguba (Ficus anthelmintica. Zich.) | Andiroba (Xylocarpus caropa. Spreng.)
Muiratinga (? ) Cujumary (Ocotea cujumary. fart.)
3iquiba (Myristica officinalis. fart.) | Mata-matd (? )

Assaci (Hura Brasiliensis. 77.) | Abutud 38)

Cupuassti-rana (Pharmacosyce doliaria. Amapa (?)

Mart.) Barbatimao (Acacia adstringens. Reise.)
Sucutba (Plumeria phagendenica. Mart.) | Manacan (Brunfelsia hopeana. Benth.)

Caju (Anacardium occidentale. Z.)

counted among the products of the forests of the interior. Even there the rich oil the
nuts contain is seldom extracted. They are usually taken down green for their cool,
refreshing water, or sent ripe into the interior for making “ doce” (sweetmeats).

* The anil, or indigo, does not grow wild in the woods, and is not indigenous; but
it thrives so plentifully there that we may hope to see it planted, and exported on
a larger scale in future years. The most valuable of all dyeing-woods—the Per-
nambuco, or Brazilwood— Cesalpinia echinata (Lamarck), called arabutan by the natives,
is frequent in the South—in Pernambuco, Bahia, Minas, and Espirito Santo, and is
still sent abroad as largely as ever. The red decoction of the wood gives, with the
addition of an acid, a red deposit, while the liquid above it takes a yellow colour.
With ammoniac, the deposit will be purple; with alum, crimson; with perchloride
of tin, pink; with acid protoxide of lead, dark red; and with iron vitriol, violet.
With corrosive sublimate of mercury, or sulphate of zine, the liquid gets of a bright
yellow.

t So called after the daring Orellana, who, in 1544, impelled by the hope of
becoming governor of the new countries, was the first to descend the Amazon, from
Pert to the Atlantic. The fanciful description he gave of an attack he sustained at
the mouth of the Nhamundé, from a horde of armed women, originated the singular
name of the river; the whole story certainly being founded on a mistake, and his wish
to make the most of his adventures. His Amazons, doubtless, were only the squaws
carrying the spare arrows of the fighting warriors, and answering the discharges of the
Spanish blunderbusses with fearful yells.

see



THE VEGETATION OF THE VIRGIN-FOREST. 125

Prants MAKING Roprs, Corps, &c.

Piassaba (Attalea funifera. art.) Uaicima Guaxima (Urena lobata).

Curua (Attalea spectabilis. fart.) y Piriquita (? )

Murity (Mauritia vinifera. Dart.) \% Curumicda (? )

Tucum (Astrocaryum tucuma. Dart.) ( Carapato (? )

Carnatiba (Copernicia cerifera: Mart.)} ™ Beribé (Anona ? )

Javary (Astrocaryum Javary. fart.) Itua (?)

Castanheira (Bertholletia excelsa. Hum.) Mamio-rana (? )

Tatajuba (Maclura ? ) Carapicho (Urena sinuata).

Turury (Couratari legalis. Hart.) Cipé (liane) ambé ( ? )

Tauary (?) 5. 3 pixuna (?)

Curau4 (Bromelia), giving a very fine . 4, timbotitica (Cissus).
and glossy fibre. » = pagé (?)

Munguba (Erythrina). 3 - ass (? )

Xury (?) + »  preto (?)
Sapucaia (Lecythis ollaria. Felloso.) 5 . rei (? )
Mata-mata (Lecythis coriacea). titara (? )
Acapurana (Wullschlaegelia. Mart.) de cerca (?)
Rutacea.

Notwithstanding the fertility of tropical vegetation, I doubt whether
any other part of the world, in the same latitude, can offer as great
a number of useful plants as does the Amazon Valley; and now, when
all-transforming steam is about to open up to us this rich emporium,
European industry should take advantage of the hitherto neglected
treasures. What might not be done with the fibres—some of which
surpass our hemp and flax in all respects? The curaua, for example,
a sort of wild pine-apple, gives a delicate transparent flax of a silky
lustre, such as is used in the Philippine Islands, on a large scale,
it appears. It is sold under the name of palha at Rio de Janeiro.
The tucum and the javary would make excellent ropes, cords, nets, &e.,
well calculated to resist moisture and rot; and the piassaba, the
murity, &c., would readily supply solid brushes, brooms, hammocks,
hats, baskets, mats; while the snow-white bast of others would give
excellent paper.

The lianas, or cipdés of these countries are, besides their minor uses,
quite indispensable to the half-civilised natives for the construction
of their light cottages; taking the place (as they do) of our nails and
cramp-irons, beams, posts, and rafters. The whole palm-leaf roof is
fastened, and artificially interwoven and intertwined, with tough creepers
of nearly an inch thickness.

According to a widespread proverb, the Jesuits, on first settling in
Brazil, demanded of the Portuguese Government, as a compensation



126 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

for the hardships they had undergone in spreading the Gospel, all those
countries of the interior ‘where the customary nails were to be found.”
This would have comprised pretty nearly all from the Atlantic to the
Cordillera, as the lianas are found everywhere in the woods; and

MOUTH OF A LATERAL RIVER ON THE MADEIRA, WITH AN INDIAN SHOOTING FISHES.

though, as is notorious, the Fathers never were timid in their demands,
it is scarcely credible that they should have formulated them in so
wide a way. But vox populi, vox Dei; and se non é€ vero, @ ben
trovato.

Jn the above list of medicinal plants, I have not mentioned



THE VEGETATION OF THE VIRGIN-FOREST. 127

one of the most important, the cinchona or Peruvian-bark tree, that
gives us the quinquina; because its home, at least that of the most
precious species, is not the moist forest of the lowlands described
here, but the valleys and glens of the chain of the Andes, some 3,000
to 6,500 feet above the sea-level. The real calysaia, that which of all
cinchonas contains most of the precious alkaloid, abounds especially
near the sources of the -Beni, while the species of the flats (Cinch.
Bergeniana, Cinch. Lambertiana, Cinch. macroenemia, Cinch. jfirmulu),
though they certainly contain quinquina and cinchonin, are as yet of no
importance to commerce.

A romantic tale has it that a 5 Conntess Chinchon, the lady of a
viceroy of Pert, was the first European cured by the bitter bark, of a
violent fit of ague, towards the end of the seventeenth century; and
that it was a descendant of the Incas, who, prompted by love of the
beautiful countess who was the wife of his hereditary foe, had given
her the specific, until then guarded with jealous secrecy by the natives.
However, it was not so much the physician as the confessor of the
noble lady, or rather the mighty Order of which he was a member,
who took advantage of the discovery by completely monopolising the
ascarilha trade. For more than a century the pounded bark came
only through the Jesuits to the European market, under the name of
Jesuit-powder. In the total absence of regular means of communication
with the interior, it was easy enough for the Padres to stifle any
attempt at competition in their numerous Missions on the eastern slope
of the Andes, where, without any restriction, they disposed of many
thousands of Indians, and to ask any price they pleased for the more
and more appreciated drug.

Like the seringuciro of the Madeira Valley, the cascarilheiro, or
bark-collector, generally a poor half-civilised Indian or nfestizo, is most
shamefully cheated out of his small, hard-earned gains; the traders
always contriving to get the bark at half-price, while “for the lead
and powder, and the half-spoiled victuals, given in exchange, they
charge double and treble value. Yet the cascarilheiro is fond of his
wild, roaming life, the hardships and fatigues of which he will endure
for months, eutting his way through the dense forest to get at the
trees he seeks, and carrying his heavy bundle of bark over hill and
dale only to be perpetually robbed in the next village. There the
eascarilha, or bark, is sewn into large bags of untanned hide, and



128 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

carried by beasts of burden to La Paz; whence it is sent by the
Peruvian seaport, Arica, to Europe and North America.

When one considers the immense distances the bark has to travel
from beside murmuring mountain rivulets,—from the valleys of Apolo-
bamba, for instance, at the foot of the eastern slope of the Cordillera,
over snow-covered passes of 14,000 feet above the sea-level to La
Paz and to the Pacific, and round Cape Horn to Europe,—it is wonderful
that the idea of following the course of these mountain streams to the
Beni and the Madeira, and by the Amazon to Pard, has not before
been taken into earnest consideration. It is true that, in this direction
also, the difficulties are not inconsiderable. The middle and the upper
course of these rivers are almost totally unknown; one of them, the
Madre de Dios, till within a few years ago, was believed to be a
tributary of the Purts, whereas it is one of the Beni and the Madeira.
The Indians on their shores are a race of treacherous savages; and the
falls and rapids of the Madeira are not, all of them, easy of passage.
To take a valuable freight, in the charge of a score or two of untrust-
worthy Indians, down such a venturesome course, requires not a little

courage; yet, after all, it seems as if the merchants of La Paz and
Arica, whose interest, of course, lies the other way, had a great deal to
do with this neglect.

During our stay at Exaltacion, however, a mercantile house of La
Paz (Farfan & Co.) made an attempt (and, as we afterwards learned, a
successful one) to take a large and most valuable cargo of cascarilha,
collected in the Sierra of Apolobamba, on light rafts down the Beni
to the Mission of Reyes; and thence on ox-carts, over the campos
on the watershed between the Beni and the Mamoré, to the Jactima,
a tributary of the latter. At the former Mission of Santa Ana, boats
were freighted with it: and they got safely through the Mamoré, the
Madeira, and the Amazon to the port of Para. The expenses of this
route, though by no means an easy one, were about half of those
incurred by way of Arica; * and assuredly, as soon as the Madeira

* It is strange that even Bolivia, though named after the “Libertador,” and called
by him (in the high-flown, soaring style of these nations) ‘‘the dearest of his
daughters,” should have been treated so illiberally in the matter of seaports when the
boundaries were fixed after the Declaration of Independence. Jt seems as if the poor
country is to be cut off from the rest of the world, or put under the everlasting tutelage
of Peri. While the latter extends over one hundred geographical miles down the
navigable Solimées, or Amazon, and has several excellent seaports on the Pacific,



THE VEGETATION OF THE VIRGIN-FOREST. 129

railroad is ready, all the bark will go by the Amazon Valley to Europe.
Then will an increased export of bark take place; and the forests on
the slopes of the Andes will be gradually invaded and explored, to
the closer arrival of that period when the danger of the complete
rooting-out of the useful tree may be anticipated. In this regard, surely,
attention should be devoted to the planting of this blessing to suffering
humanity in countries wherein it is indigenous, secing that the attempts
made by the Dutch and English Governments in Java, Ceylon, and on
the Himalayas do not seem to have been quite satisfactory as to the
quality of the bark in respect of quinquina. In Brazil several plantations
of cinchona have been made on the Serra dos Orgaos: but they are still
too young to allow of our judging of the result. As the Bolivian
Government has forbidden, under the severest penalties, the export of the
young plants and seeds, it is very difficult and expensive to get saplings.
Seeds, indeed, are easier to obtain; but they offer less chances of success.

Without a very strong impulse from without, neither the Bolivian nor
the Peruvian Governments, alternately in the hands of spur-clattering
usurpers and ambitious lawyers, will make the slightest effort; and, as
there is small hope of long diplomatic debates being held in the behalf of
fever-shaken humanity, things will remain in statu quo for many years
to come.

Bolivia lost Arica, which should, by all means, be hers, and now is perfectly isolated in
that direction, as Cobija, being situated in a waterless desert, never will be of any
great service to commerce. And hardly better are its natural communications with the
Atlantic. There Brazil, owning both shores of the Madeira far into the region of
the rapids, and the Argentine Republic claiming the right shore of the navigable
Paraguay up to the confines of Mato Grosso, exclude it from the navigation of the
two chief highways of trade—the Amazon and the River Plate—and hinder the growing
of staples near their territory. Almost all the Bolivian trade goes by way of Arica, the
Peruvian Government levying heavy taxes; so that the opening of the Madeira road
will, indeed, be the source of life to all Bolivia: and the cession of some hundreds of
square miles of (as yet useless) primeval forest to Brazil, thus removing its frontiers on
the Madeira from Santo Antonio to the mouth of the Beni, that is, from 8° 49’ to 10° 20'
8. lat., appears a trifle in view of the advantages derived. It looks almost like madness
on the part of the Brazilian Government to continue to add to the ocean of forest it
owns already on the Amazon, especially as there is no strategic point of any importance
on the claimed territory, as in the contested land on the Paraguay between the Apa
and the Mondego. The only pretext for it can be that Perd, the ever-threatening
enemy of Brazil, regards itself as the heir of Bolivia (so to say), and will be so much
the poorer for it some day. Of course there was no want of Peruvian protests and
expressions of the deepest indignation, which sounded strange enough from that
quarter; and Brazil, in some future contest with the Argentine Republic, may surely
count on seeing Peruvian men-of-war coming down from Iquitos to test the solidity of
the walls of Tabatinga, on the Solimdes.

K



130 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

Let us return, however, from the snowy heights of the Andes to the
hot lowlands of the Amazon, where, in the shade of endless forest, there
is many a herb of mysterious virtue, as yet known only to wild Indian
tribes, while the fame of others has already spread over the ocean. Who
has not heard of the urary, or curare, the quick arrow-poison which, in
the hands of clever physiologists and physicians, promises not only to
become a valuable drug, but to give us interesting disclosures on the
activity of the nerves ?

The wondrous tales of former travellers regarding the preparation of
this urary have been rectified long ago. The venom of snakes is not
used for it, but the juice of the bruised stems and leaves of several kinds
of strychnos and apocyneas is simply boiled over a coal fire, mixed with
tobacco juice and capsicum (Spanish pepper), and thickened with the
sticky milk of some Euphorbiacca to a hard mass. This manipulation,
moreover, is not undertaken by the old squaws of the tribe, devoting
themselves to a painful death thereby, as the old stories ran; but, as
there is no danger whatever, by the young wives of the warriors, who
look upon it as part of their household duties, or by the men themselves.
There are about eight or ten different poisons of similar, but not identical,
composition and preparation, of which the urary of the Macusi Indians,
and the curare, from Venezuela and New Granada, are considered the
most powerful.

This dark brown, pitchy substance, usually kept in little earthen pots,
is lightly spread over the points of the weapons, their long arrows, their
light spears, and the thin wooden shafts, of about a foot long, which they
shoot through immense blow-tubes (sarabacanas). Immediately upon
the diffusion in the blood of the slightest portion of the’ poison the
limbs, one by one, refuse to work, as if overcome with torpor, while
the mind apparently retains its activity until death ensues,—which it
does in a few minutes’ time, from palsy of the lungs. It is strange
that only those nerves are affected which regulate the movements
depending on our own will, whereas those movements we cannot control,
the beating of the heart for example, continue unaltered to the very last.
Experiments made by French physicians upon animals have shown
that, if the lungs are artificially kept in activity for several hours, the
poison will be rejected by natural means, and no bad consequences
will ensue. Of late the principal objection to the employment of
the urary in medicine—its unequal strength—has been completely over-



THE VEGETATION OF THE VIRGIN-FOREST. 131

come by the effective alkaloid—the curarin—being extracted. This is
about twenty times as powerful as the urary, and has been used success-
fully in the treatment of tetanus. The Indians shoot birds and monkeys,
which they wish to tame, with very weak curare, rousing them from
the lethargy which overpowers them with large doses of salt or sugar-
juice; and this treatment is said to be very effective also in the
reduction of their wildness.

It is a remarkable fact that the Indians on the right shore of the
Amazon neither prepare nor use the poison, though the plants that
supply the chief ingredients are certainly found there as well as on
the left shore, on which tribes differing widely in customs and language
use the subtle weapon. It would be difficult to say by what chance
their ancestors first came to prepare it, as the poisonous qualities of
the plants, before their sap is concentrated by boiling, are by no means
very striking.

It certainly was a great invention in aid of their hunting, on
which chiefly they depended for food; and we can well imagine that
they took some trouble to improve it: but how came they to prepare
the guarana, resembling tea and coffee in its effects, from an insignificant-
looking dry fruit of the forest? Some weary and famished hunter must
have tried the unpalatable beans, and found that they wonderfully
strengthened and refreshed him, and thence must have ensued the
collection and bruising of the fruits and the planting of the seeds near
their cabins.

The guarand, prepared from the fruit of the Paullinia sorbilis, is
a hard, chocolate-brown mass, of a slightly bitter taste, and of no
smell whatever. It is usually sold in cylindric pieces of from 10 inches
to a foot in length, in which the half-bruised almond-like seeds are
still distinguishable; the more homogeneous and the harder the mass,
the better is its quality. To render it eatable, or rather drinkable, it
is rasped as fine as possible on the rough, bony roof of the mouth of
the sudis gigas (pird-ructi), and mixed with a little sugar and water.
A tea-spoonful in a cup of warm water is said to be an excellent
remedy in slight attacks of ague.

The taste of this beverage, reminding one slightly of almonds, is
very palatable; still it scarcely accounts for the passionate liking
entertained for it by the inhabitants of the greater part of South
America. It must be the stimulating effects of the paullinin it contains

K 2



132 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

(an alkaloid like cafeine and theine) that render it so indispensable
to those who have been accustomed to it. All the boats that come
lightly freighted with ipecacuanha and deer or tiger-hides, from Mato
Grosso down the Arinos and the Tapajoz, in face of the considerable
cataracts and rapids of the latter, take their full loads of guarand at
Santarem; and the heavy boats of the Madeira also convey large
quantities of it to Bolivia; for at Cuyaba, as well as at Santa Cruz
de la Sierra and Cochabamba, there are many who cannot do without
their guarana, for which they often have to pay 30 francs the pound,
and who prefer all the rigours of fasting to abstinence from their
favourite beverage. On the other hand, the mestizo population on the
Amazon, where it is prepared on a large scale by the half-civilised
tribes of the Mauh¢és and Mundurucis and sold at about 3 francs the
pound, are not so passionately attached to it; they rather take coffee,
and a sort of coarse chocolate, which they manufacture for themselves.

The stimulant most in use with the Indian population of Bolivia
is the coca.* The thin leaves (about 14 inches in length) of the
coca bush, which already is largely cultivated in Bolivia and Peri,
are dried in the sun, and, with the addition of some fine ashes and
a bit of red pepper, are chewed by the natives. It is said to render
them less sensible to the cold on the icy heights of the Andes, and to
reduce the severity of the soroche, that painful oppression of the chest
with nausea caused by the rareness of the air on the mountain-passes.
The Quichua Indians, indeed, will not venture there without a plentiful
provision of coca leaves; and all travellers concur in admiring their
strength and endurance in carrying heavy burdens over the steepest
and roughest paths, with no restorative save their highly prized coca.
How indispensable it is to them is evidenced by the fact that one
of the last presidents of Bolivia, who, in a fit of reforming zeal,
conceived the idea of serving out coffee and brandy in leu of their
coca ration to his Indian and mestizo army, was forecd by the out-
break of a mutiny to withdraw his ukase and to let them have their
beloved herb as they desired. The Indians on the Upper Amazon and
the Solimées also know it under the name of ipadi. Taken as tea, it
has a slight aroma of camomile.

These facts considered, the question naturally arises, how it has come

* Erythroxylon Coca.



THE VEGETATION OF THE VIRGIN-FOREST. 133

about that nations living so widely apart and so mutually antagonistic
have, out of the rich tropical vegetation, selected plants that have
analogous, if not identical, effects on the nervous system, such as the
maté, cacdo, guarand, coca, coffee, and tea; and this, moreover, at a
time when even the rudiments of natural science were not in existence.
The process of satisfying this craving for stimulants, which seems to
be so deeply rooted in mankind, has without doubt been the means of
promoting the advance of civilisation. Our knowledge of the facts
connected with pre-historic American cultivation being so indefinite, it is
the more to be regretted that the precise period at which some American
Noah first made his lucky discovery of maté or coca will probably
continue to be as doubtful as the exact date at which some serious Arab
first brewed the reviving black drink of the Levant.

Whether these first movements of civilisation, visible in the use of
such treasures, reach as far back in America as they do in Asia, cannot,
therefore, be decided @ priori; the same impenetrable darkness covers
both. But, notwithstanding their subsequent disparity, it is certainly
possible that the natives of both the Old and the New World reached,
at about the same time, a sufficient degree of civilisation to enable them
to appropriate to the use of themselves more of the surrounding gifts
of Nature than a few wild fruits and easily-caught animals; they. only
began the battle of life under unequal conditions. Besides higher mental
gifts originally, perhaps, allotted to the Caucasian race, the advantages of
more favourable climate, and the topographical superiority of part of Asia
and Southern Europe, have enabled nations on the shores of the Mediter-
ranean, more than two thousand years ago, to attain to so high a degree
of civilisation that its achievements are our models to this very day,
while the natives of the New World still remain wild and half-wild
fishers and hunters.

Only in Mexico, Central America, and Peri, have favouring cireum-
stances helped the red-skins to pass, by an easy transition, from the
condition of hunters and nomads to that of cattle breeders and agricul-
turists, and thus to reach a higher degree of civilisation; while, on the
contrary, in the rest of America, immense tracts of forest rendered. cattle
breeding impossible, reduced agriculture to a minimum, and necessitated
the dispersion of the various tribes, in small hordes, to secure their
maintenance by the produce of the chase. Of course, every such
separation was rendered permanent by the difficulty of communication ;



134 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

and this must be regarded as one of the principal causes of the infinite
number of languages and dialects in the New World; which, in their
turn, were additional serious drawbacks to general progress. Languages
which have not been reduced to writing must change rapidly. Even the
bodily peculiarities of different families, the shape of their lips, &c., will
suffice to form an idiom, differing materially from the original one ;* and
such changes must have contributed to keep the separated hordes asunder,
especially as the principle adopted by all people living in a state of
nature seems to be: whoever does not speak my language is my foe.

Their division into so many hundreds of tribes and hordes, and
the great number of their languages and idioms, made Martius, the
learned explorer of Brazil, think that the state of the autochthons
of America, though a primitive, is not their original one; that they.
are not a wild but a degenerate race, the degraded relics of a more
perfect past, whose dissolution had begun thousands of years before the
Conquest.

There is no doubt that this process has, since then, been accelerated
by bloody wars and persecutions, reduction of their hunting-grounds,
contagious diseases, and want of physical and moral comforts; but I
do not believe there is any reason to date this decay from pre-historic
times. When the hordes of Spanish adventurers destroyed the realm
of the Incas, they found a prosperous and improving country; and
their proud temples, as Martius urges in further proof, were by no means
in ruins then. In additional support of lis hypothesis, he points to the
remains of hierarchical and monarchical institutions among all, even
the most’ savage tribes, and the state of many of their plants, which
nowadays are not found anywhere growing wild. But might not these
vestiges of institutions be the beginnings as well as the remains of
a civilisation? And might not nations standing on a very low level

* A very clever and learned monk of the Order of St. Benedict, Frei Camillo de
Monserrate, custodian of the National Library at Rio de Janeiro up to the time of his
death recently, and who, in his long voyages on the West coast of America, had had
ample opportunities for comparative study of Indian languages, expressed himself in
a conversation with me, to the effect that everything in this respect was to be accounted
for by natural and material reasons; and that he was sure that ‘“ el,” for instance, a
final syllable recurring very frequently in the Mexican language, had arisen from the
eustom of the old Mexicans of pricking their tongues, in a sort of religious frenzy, with
the long thorns of a large cactus, so that this organ was continually affected with
ae A them, and caused them to lisp and stammer, ultimately producing the strange
syllable.


THE VEGETATION OF THE VIRGIN-FOREST. 185

have brought these plants to the state of culture we sec them in now,
unintentionally and almost involuntarily? To the present day, even
the wildest hordes have plantations of Indian corn, tobacco, cotton,
plantains and mandioca, near their cabins; not on a large scale, of
course, as that would be impossible with their roaming mode of life
and inferior implements. No one can doubt that the improved form
exhibited by these plants is the result of a very ancient cultivation;
but there is no proof in it of an extinct higher civilisation on the
part. of the planters, though it must be confessed that the analogy
with our own nutritious plants, brought from the seats of the earliest
civilisation, is rather tempting; and the contrast between the very
primitive mode of life of half-naked savages and the existence of such
treasures is, at first sight, very striking. Another proof of the very
ancient influence of man on these plants is the fact that some of them
(as the banana* and the pupunha-palm) no longer produce seeds fit
for germination, but are entirely dependent on the human hand for
their propagation; and so is the existence of a great variety of others,
the Indian corn for instance. Of this, several tribes have favourite
varieties, which they cultivate exclusively. Thus the Guaranis of the
Southern provinces prefer the small stripes with red and bluish speckles,
whose grains are casily pounded to a palatable flour, while the Coroados
only plant corn with large stripes, red on the lower and yellow at the
upper end.

To reach their present state of perfection, all these plants required
human tending the more that, with the single exception of the pupunha,
they were of the class of tender herbaceous plants, of short-lived duration,
incapable of thriving in the close mato virgem or primeval forest, and
whose light-green leaves and slender white stems offer a striking
contrast to the latter’s hard column-like trunks and dark-leaved under-
wood. Their first requirements are air and sunshine, whereas the
shade and protection of their own leafy canopy are so vitally necessary
to the plants of the mato virgem that, if seeds are planted in the
ground on a space cleared beyond design, they do not germinate, but
make room for a sccondary vegetation, longing for air and light.t

* The Musacezw (Musa paradisiaca), and the other East Indian varieties imported
by the Portuguese (Jfusa sapientum and the like), have numerous shoots if the ehief
stem is cut down; and nothing grows easier than the banana in these climes: yet

its range would be a very limited one if it were left to multiply only in this way.
+ In cur European forests something similar is going on, though not in so striking



136 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

Only after the lapse of some fifty or sixty years, when daylight
shall have stolen somewhat through the dense leafage of the capoeira
(as the Brazilians call the second growth), which never rises, however,
to any considerable height, here and there perhaps some seed of a
palisander or a bertholletia may shoot up; and two hundred years
afterwards the proud, dark, primeval forest spreads again over the

ground that once was its own.

a way. If an old oak-forest is felled, useless and worthless shrubbery first springs
up, and is replaced by better timber only afterwards.



CHAPTER VI.
THE WILD INDIAN TRIBES OF THE MADEIRA VALLEY.

The Muras.—The Ardras.—The Mundructs.—The Perentintins—The Caripunas.—
Our First Meeting with the
Latter.— Their Malocca. —
Their Way of Burying
the Dead.—Former Attacks
on the Madeira, Javary, and
Puris.—The Unknown Way-
layers at the Mouth of the
Mamoré.—Future of these
Indians.—Their Languages
and Religious Views.—Their
Pajés.—An Old Settlement.

cle » saying diffused over

3 the whole Amazon
region: ‘lazy like
a Mira who sleeps on
three cords ;” that is, who
does not even take the
trouble of making a pro-
per hammock; and. in-
deed the saying is right.
The Maras are the laziest
of all the lazy Indians of
these parts. They are
despicable alike to white
and coloured men; and
notwithstanding their well-known skill in hunting, fishing, diving and
“similar free arts,” any other Indian or mestizo would think it the
gravest insult to be taken for one of these pariahs. Once they were
a powerful tribe; but bloody feuds with the Mundructs, at the end
of the last century, reduced them to the poor condition we now see



138 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

them in, leading an unsettled, gipsy life on the Amazon and the lower
course of its tributaries; on any of which their light pirogues, some-
times in flotillas of twenty and thirty, may be seen gliding swiftly along.
Owing to the accession of runaway slaves, they exhibit somewhat of the
mulatto type; and their degeneracy has been so complete as almost
to have extinguished their original character; which, said to have been
a warlike and courageous one, now fitfully breaks out in daring
robberies and treacherous murders. In less than a hundred and fifty
years even their last remnants will probably have vanished entirely,
not much to the detriment of the country, which can well spare a
stubborn element, incapable of adapting itsclf to the new order of things
fast approaching.

At Sapucaia-Oroca, on the right shore of the Madeira, at about
125 miles from its mouth, there is a Mira settlement, which consists
of about a dozen miserable sheds, scarcely large enough to tie the
celebrated three cords underneath, in which they repose after their
fishing or thieving excursions. Below Sapucaia-Oroca, towards Borba
and the mouth of the Madeira, the population is the same mixed one
as on the Amazon. The light cabins, peeping picturesquely out of
vacao groves and banana plantations, are inhabited by mestizoes of all
shades and degreés, and occasionally by a mulatto or sambo, all of
them able to speak Portuguese just to the extent required for inter-
course with the outer world. Assuredly the time is not far distant
when easier communications, and the all-levelling influence of trade, will
have erased the last traces of real Indian life from these regions.

The above-mentioned Mundrucis, formerly the mightiest and most
warlike tribe of these parts, have only a few decaying settlements,
of three or four cottages, on the Lower Madeira, their chief seats
being on the Mauhés and the Tapajoz. After a long and most violent
resistance, this tribe made peace with the Portuguese, at the end of
the last century; and they have faithfully adhered to them ever since,
even during the terrible “guerra dos cabanos,” so fateful to all the
pale-faces. If proper attention had been devoted to some branches
of their national industry, such as the preparation of the Guarana
and Para tobacco, the manufacture of magnificent hammocks and feather
ornaments, this tribe certainly would have had a prosperous career.
At Mandos we saw some of their chieftains, with their faces tattooed
all over in black. This unfortunately was the only item of their

20 eg


THE WILD INDIAN TRIBES OF THE MADEIRA VALLEY. 139

national costume. They wore—horribile dictu !—coloured cotton shirts,
black coats and inexpressibles, and tall hats! Anything more ludicrous
could not well be imagined. Generally speaking, there is nothing so
conspicuous and ridiculous as coloured people (negro, mulatto, sambo,
or mestizo) in what they consider Sunday apparel of unrivalled elegance.
A pretty negro or mulatto girl (of the Mina tribe, for instance) looks
quite a queen, in her way, in her costume of lace-trimmed chemise of
dazzling whiteness, set off by the velvet-like dark skin, her gaudy
short petticoat ending in points below; a white, yellow, or green kerchief,
slung with inimitable grace turbanwise round her short ringlets; and
a shawl they call panno da costa, with large blue, white, and black
stripes, hanging carelessly over her shoulders or round her waist. Some
coral bracelets, or ornaments of massive gold, which never saw the
inside of a Pforzheim melting-pot, complete the outfit, whose brilliant
colours and easy grace contrast strikingly with our fashionable black,
brown, or grey strait-waistcoats. But when you see the same creature,
after (it may be) her entering the service of some noble family as
nurse or lady’s-maid, in a tight black silk dress; her woolly curls
twisted, with pomatum, scissors, and comb, into a shape slightly
resembling the chignon of her mistress; in high-heeled boots, instead
of her richly embroidered slippers; with some big, tasteless brooch,
instead of her corals and heavy gold filigree ;—the graceful creature is
transformed into a hideously ridiculous monster: but squeamish Decency
is not offended, and does not now, with averted head, hiss out—
“Shocking!” The same happens with our own country people: how
much more with the Indians! ;

The Mundructis have long abandoned their supremacy on the Madeira.
They left this river even before the Conquest, I believe, to another
powerful tribe, the Ardras, who also nowadays are not held in the
same fear as they were formerly. Towards the end of the last century,
more than once they seriously menaced the former Mission of Araretama,
now Borba; and the whole lower course of the Madeira was haunted
and rendered unsafe by them: but now they have totally retired to
the forests on the right shore, whence they break out only now and
again, appearing and disappearing with the rapidity of lightning. None
of the settlers, however, will venture into one of the smaller lateral
valleys, where they are still kept in awe by the strong bows and
long arrows of the former masters of the territory. The immediate



140 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

shores of the mainstream are tolerably safe now for many a weary
day’s voyage, as one may readily conjecture from the cottages of the
peaceable seringuciros thinly scattered along, until one has reached
the domain of the ill-famed Parentintins, anthropophagous hordes,
always ready for robbery and murder, and evidently the closest
guardians of the rich seringaes (caoutchoue woods) on their territory,
for the chances of being murdered and roasted are heavy odds against
the acquisition of a few pounds of india-rubber.

Usually the traveller sces so little of these dangerous neighbours,
the Araras and Parentintins, that he might be tempted to take the
fearful tales of the caoutchouc gatherers for mere inventions of their
awe-stricken fancy; but a few light pirogues of the former, which
drifted down a lateral affluent, and the total absence of any settlement
on the domain of the latter, disposed us to think otherwise. Moreover,
the black corner-posts of a burnt cottage near Crato (marked as a
town on the geographical maps, but in reality but one house and a
few sheds), told their own tale of a whole family having been murdered
and roasted there a few years ago by the Parentintins.* As in such
cases nothing at all is done by the Brazilian Government, whose
principle (very different from the fire-and-sword policy of the Portuguese )
it is to spare the natives as much as possible, the few unprotected
settlers must make room if they would not incur the danger of
sharing the fate of their neighbours. The only mode of evading the
difficulty thus created, of uniting humanity towards the natives with
a sound protection of the settlers, so necessary for the future prosperity
of the country, is to found Indian colonies—Aldeamentos or Missions
—among the Indians themselves. But this gigantic work, as is well
known, has been undertaken successfully only by the Jesuits, and even
by them under particularly favourable conditions.

* As I write, I learn from the President of the Madeira and Mamoré Railway
Company that a small number of Englishmen in the service of the Company have been
attacked by the Parentintins at St. Antonio; and a few days afterwards an outpost a
little higher up, consisting of a few Mojos Indians, headed by an engineer, were driven
back by another troop of savages. As in both cases these escaped without any loss,
not one shot having been fired at them, while the Company had two Mojos Indians
killed, they are sure soon to return, and will not, by their visits, add to the comfort
of the little colony. However, the hiring of a larger number of workmen, principally
Europeans—say to the extent of two thousand—and of as many Mojos Indians from
Bolivia (which might easily be effected), besides being absolutely necessary for the
prosecution of the works, will finally have the effect of putting down these attacks,

ee


THE WILD INDIAN TRIBES OF THE MADEIRA VALLEY. 141

Under the energetic rule of this Order (whose evil influence in
civilised countries I have not forgotten, by the way), numerous Indian
settlements, or Missions, had been created on different points of South
America, in the sixteenth, seventeenth, and eighteenth centuries, whose
crumbling fragments still excite our admiration and wonder. In the
midst of pathless wildernesses, on the shores of rivers showing more
than their full share of rapids, cataracts, and other obstructions to
navigation, and scarcely ever heard of before, there sprung up flourishing
settlements, with extensive plantations of Indian corn, mandioc, cotton,
sugar-cane, and Ilex Paraguayensis, and numerous herds grazing around ;
in short, containing all the germs of future prosperity, and the sound
development of agriculture and trade. The difficulties the Padres had
to overcome, too, were greater by far than they are now. There were
then no proud steamers ploughing these gigantic waters in the tenth
part of the time taken by their slow sailing-boats; and a traveller or
a missionary can now reach at least the boundaries of these out-of-
the-way places in vigorous health, and unworn by the fatigues of the
way. Diligent inquirers have familiarised us somewhat with the lan-
guages and customs of a good many Indian tribes; and we know, at
any rate, what we have to expect from them; and, even if the certainty
be not always a very comforting one, it spares us the pang of dis-
appointment, and enables us to prepare for all eventualities.

In spite of the improved condition of things, the present Catechese
dos Indios (as the Brazilians call it), mostly im the hands of Italian
monks who have formerly been clerks and schoolmasters, yields but
poor results, such as not to encourage the Government to further efforts.

The following literally true narrative of an occurrence will throw
a pretty clear light on the present position of affairs. Some six or
seven years ago, the inhabitants of a small cottage on the Rio Negro,
above Mandos, were found murdered. As the tibie of the victims,
which are used for flutes by a neighbouring tribe, had been taken
out, there could not be any doubt left as to the identity of the
murderers. The Government, reluctantly yielding to the petitions of
the surrounding families, resolved to send a missionary; and one of
the Italian Capuchin monks at the Hospice of Rio de Janeiro was
ordered to go. At Manaos he provided himself, at the expense of the
Government, with a large number of presents for the sons of the forest,
such ag scissors, knives, beads, and small looking-glasses, and demanded



——e

ee re

|
|

——

ed

142 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

a well-armed escort of twenty men, with a sergeant or cabo. Though
this seemed to look rather suspicious, the new apostle to the heathen
was humoured, and he betook himself to his post of danger, relying
for his security on his lofty mission and his bayonets. | Nothing
apparently had taken place there from the date of the last attack;
the blackened posts, which once had supported the light palm-roof
of a happy family, pointing sadly to the sky, and around the devastated
mandioca plantation the silent density of the forest uninvaded by the
trace of either friend or foe. It would require one to have felt all the
heart-sickening loneliness, all the dreary melancholy of such a desolate
place, to understand thoroughly the thoughts which must have then
assailed the poor Brother, and how, not quite prepared to become a
martyr, and with a secret yearning for the dull cell he had left
behind him in the convent, he must have stealthily examined his
shin-bones at night to see that they were there all right.

But an Italian friar has ingenious brains; and had not he con-
sidered and studied, theoretically at least, all the difficulties a modern
missionary has to encounter in the Old and New World, even before
he had left his convent at Genoa? Besides, he had twenty stout negro
and mulatto boys behind him; and he thought it best to make the
most of ¢hem, and to reserve for himself the supreme finishing-stroke,
such as the christening of the subdued chieftain, with all his family
or even all his tribe. So the cabo, with six men, was ordered to
ascend a small affluent of the Rio Negro, whose shores gave signs
of being peopled by the expected Indians, and, as an introductory
measure of conciliation, to leave there some of the presents. The
sergeant, who probably saw his way somewhat more clearly than his
holy master, was lucky enough to discover near the mouth of the little
river the opening of a narrow Indian path; and there he hung up his
beads, scissors, &c., on the surrounding bushes, as if they were German
Christmas-trees. On the next day he returned to fetch his answer;
and he got it; but in the unexpected shape of a thick hail of arrows
showering from out the very bushes whereon his presents were still
suspended. Luckily the ungrateful waylayers had taken aim too hastily ;
the sergeant and his men leaped out of the boat, and screening them-
selves behind it as with a shield, drifted slowly down the river to
where the Frater waited impatiently for them. The holy man had
not even the satisfaction of curing a wound got in the strife, and had





——

FIRST

INTERVIEW

WITH CARIPUNA INDIANS (Maverna

etiaase


THE WILD INDIAN. TRIBES OF THE MADEIRA‘: VALLEY, 148

to content himself -with showing the arrows sticking in: the boat as
corpus delicti. His wisdom, however, was at an end; and he: could
not hit upon any better plan than asking the President of the provinee
for one hundred soldiers more, with a view to taking more energetic
measures. Of course he was given to understand that the Government
by no means intended opening a campaign against the Indians; and,
even if such had been the case, Sua Reverendissima should certainly
not be troubled with the conduct of the military operations. The
champion of the Church, who, perhaps, on that field might have
given better proofs of capacity, returned, rather offended, to his convent;
and the mestizoes of the Rio Negro, prizing their tibiae somewhat,
help themsclves as they did before; that is, they kill every wild
Indian they can set hands on, and everything remains in the old bad
state.

Very different from these Indians, and the above-mentioned Paren-
tintins and Araras, are the Caripunas, who live a little higher up,
in the region of the Madeira rapids. They also do not enjoy a very
high reputation for peaceableness: but, at least in our case, they
condeseended to have friendly intercourse. Perhaps their good
behaviour was influenced by our numbers, six white men armed with
guns, and eighty Indian paddlers with knives and bows, though they
certainly must have known that the latter are not much to be feared
in case of a fight. As we passed one morning the smooth below the
rapid of Caldcirio do Inferno, we saw three bark canoes, full of
Indians, half-hidden under the overhanging boughs of the opposite
shore. Before we had time to think of the course we should pursue,
one of them was turned round, and in a few moments had reached
us. There were two Indians and a very corpulent female in it, all
quite naked, save a small apron on the latter. They were strong,
well-shaped figures, of middle size, with long black hair hanging
down to their shoulders; one of the men had it twined into a big
plait. They had the long curved: fore-teeth of the capivara * stuck
through their. cars, and both males and female wore small bunches
of red feathers, looking like scarlet mustachios, in their noses, which
gave them quite a queer and strange appearance even to us, who had

* Tydrocherus Capivara, a rodent of the size of our tame pig, and much resembling
the Guinea-pig, is found in numerous troops on the shores of almost all the South
American rivers.



144 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

already seen others of the brown sons of the woods.* They had
no arms whatever with them; and this fact, and the company of one
of their spouses, were to us sure signs of their friendly intentions. Yet

/

‘ARIPUNAS).

Pr

ARARAS AND C€

BARK-CANOE OF WILD INDIANS (

our Mojos Indians, who appeared quite respectable and decent in their
long bast shirts, when compared with our new acquaintance, looked

* Caripunas-Indiani penem ad preputium linis ligatum et sursum tractum
destinatumque ad lineam ventri cireumdatam ita gestant, ut perpendiculari ratione
erigatur. Miri istius moris que sit vera causa, non satis compertum habemus. Mojos
Indianos tamen, qui pertinent ad Missiones juxta Mamoré fluvium, novimus preeputium
eodem modo preeligare; scilicet quum fistule urinalis os yelant prorsus satisfecisse
se pudicitize legibus credentes.

-


THE WILD INDIAN TRIBES OF THE MADEIRA VALLEY. 145

shyly and suspiciously at them from under their large-brimmed hats.
“No Christianos!” whispered in my ear Remigio, our bigot capitano
and steersman, in whose mind the doctrines he had been taught in the
former Mission of Trinidad had fallen on but too fertile ground. Pro-
bably he meant it as a last, though unsuccessful, protest against any
intercourse with his unbaptized naked cousins. He, whose ancestors
less than two centuries ago must have presented about the same
appearance, could not discover any worse fault in them than that they
were “no Christians,” while his own Christianity, of which he thought
so highly, barely went beyond hearing mass, mumbling his rosary, and
singing endless litanies.

However, our heathens did not seem to heed the sulky looks of their
brown relations since they were received kindly by the white-faces ;
and, without waiting for a further invitation, the steersman of the
nutshell, as soon as he had put her alongside of our heavy barque, leapt
over with an engaging grin, and sat down among us just as if he were
an old friend. He was a lively fellow of twenty-five or thirty years.
With a quick eye he took in everything around him: our arms, guns,
cutlases, and wood-knives, suspended beneath the palm-leaf awning of
our boats, seemed especially to interest him; and I am sure he did
not forget to mention them in his report to the chieftam. Unfortunately,
our conversation, carried on for the most part by signs, was perforce
a very limited one, and though “ The Driving Cloud,” or “The Tiger’s
Claw,” or whatever else he might be called,* did not disdain to accept
a knife, a little mirror, and a row of white beads (of which he already
wore such a quantity round his neck that they formed a sort of cuirass
on his chest), we could only make out of his gibberish that “at home”
they had much sweet macacheira, that is mandioca; which we regarded
as a sort of rustic invitation.

The Mojos—our most Christian Remigio even included—obeyed the
erder we gave them to follow the bark-canoe, shooting rapidly ahead,
with better grace than might have been expected. Mayhap the be-
haviour of the “no Christianos” had not struck them as being so very
ferocious and cannibal-like, or the mention of the greatly longed-for
root sounded sweet in their ears. As we approached the opposite

ae ae 2

* With the Coroados of the South, such names as “‘ Falcon’s Hye, and the like,
reminding of the North American red-skins, are very common, while the softer
Guaranis call themselves after fruits, trees, stars, &c.

L



146 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

shore, we saw the whole tribe, about sixty warriors and as many women
and children, waiting for us under the shady roof of orchid-covered
figueiras, interspersed with slender palms and magnificent fanlike
strelitzias. In the first row stood the chieftain, a strongly-built, short
man. of about fifty, shouldering his long bow and two or three arrows.
Ifis broad face, framed within thick masses of lank black hair, was
painted black near the large mouth; and his appearance altogether

PORTRAIT OF A YOUNG CARIPUNA INDIAN.

could be called anything but lovely. Besides the thick cuirass of beads
and the graceful trinkets in cars and nose, he wore a magnificent
diadem of yellow and red toucan feathers; and it must be confessed
that he wore it with the dignity of a king.

He seemed to be inclined graciously towards us, probably in con-
Sequence of the report of his ambassador, who in his feather-light craft
had arrived a little before us; and with a majestic wave of the head



THE WILD INDIAN TRIBES OF THE MADEIRA VALLEY. 147

he invited us to approach and to follow; which we did, surrounded
by a dense crowd of laughing and chattering squaws and children,
serious and respectable-looking old men, and young warriors. The
chieftain marched slowly ahead, and led us along a narrow but care-
fully cleaned path, bordered with a vegetation by whose profusion
we had never before been so impressed. Trunks of gigantic size,
graceful palms of every variety, blooming creepers and_ bromelias,
orchids of the strangest shapes, and light ferns, with the warm sun-
beams breaking through the dense leafage at intervals, and suddenly
setting off some brilliant flower, some scarlet feather ornament, or the
white glittering beads on the brown skins of our new friends—all
combined to make it a picture none of us shall ever be able to forget.
Our own myrmidons followed, looking not over-confident in their own
strength, and completed the long cortége, the end of which was lost
in the darkness of the forest.

At the distance of about half a mile from the shore we reached a
clearing in the wood, with three large cabins closed in on the sides,
and a smaller open shed, which evidently was the meeting-hall of the
men. We were desired to take seats there in hammocks, not very
remarkable for their cleanliness, and we forthwith began the distri-
bution of our knives, scissors, fishing-hooks, red cotton handkerchiefs,
&c.; in barter for which we got a good quantity of macacheira and
Indian corn, half-a-dozen long bows and a bundle of arrows.* On. the
whole, they did not seem to be as greedy for the produce of our
industry as we had seen other more civilised tribes, for example, the
Tapuyos on the Amazon, and the Mojos of Bolivia. They had not yet
had enough iron in hand to understand its value thoroughly. Their
arrow-points of bamboo or hard wood, and the sharpened edges of a
river-shell,t evidently appeared to be quite as effective to them as our

* The bartering for a pretty cotton apron tastefully adorned with feathers was a
little more difficult ; yet one of our companions at last succeeded in getting one for
us. The brown beauty, who had dexterously replaced it with a heliconia leaf, looked
rather abashed on the ground, in spite of all the paradisaic innocence of the clothing.

+ The Caripuna squaws give birth to their children before the whole tribe, but
without the assistance of any one, and themselves cut the navel-string with the
sharpened edge of a river-shell. The Cayowa women of the South go unattended to
the wood when their hour of labour arrives, and return with the baby, when all is
over, to discharge their household duties, and to wait upon the husband, who for a week
lies motionless in his hammock, and behaves himself as if he were the patient. On
remonstrances or railleries of the white faces, he only answers with a pitying smile.

eZ

a

es 7 ~



148 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

knives ;* and if they graciously accepted our glittering steelware, it
seemed to be more out of curiosity than anything else. Very different
was it with the glass beads, which they prized highly, and which
seemed to be a sort of money with them, and the place of which,
before their intercourse with the white race, is said to have been
supplied by the small hard seeds of certain plants.

Besides the hammocks there was no ‘ furniture” whatever in the
Parliament-house, save some long thin drums,—for their festivals,
probably,—a few pretty baskets of palm-leaves with feather ornaments
in them, and some bows and arrows suspended to the beams; the
former of the dark wood of the paxiuba-palm, the latter of the light
stems of the uba reed. Some slight cavities in the ground, with flat
stones in the middle of each, showed us clearly that the Caripunas
followed the custom of many other tribes, of burying their warriors in
large earthen urns (or igacabas) in the cottages. We counted five of
them; and it was easy to see that soon the burial-ground would have
to be enlarged, or the whole tribe would require to shift, if they were
all to have the same honours. The latter course will probably be
adopted, as by stress of the scarcity of the game they scare away
the Indians are compelled to change their abodes from time to time.
The Coroados, in fact, do so every few years, and burn down their
light sheds on account of the vermin.

As the igacabas were barely covered with earth, we suppose that
they contained only the clean bones of the dead. We could not, of
course, think of excavating one of them or even of looking closer at
the tombs; the more so as a characteristic incident revealed to us the
degree of respect and awe with which they regarded whatever has to
do with their dead. I asked one of the younger Indians to give me,
in exchange for a pair of scissors, a very queer-looking instrument,
consisting of a thin board of half a yard length, which, when whirled
about by a slender cord drawn through the middle, must give a
whizzing sound. The boy, immediately turning round to one of the
elder Indians, explained to him my request, in a tone whose excitement

On closer acquaintance, however, they used to say that it is necessary for the welfare of
the child, who would infallibly fall ill if the father did not observe a strict regimen.

* The Coroados fasten old knife-blades at the end of the arrows they use for
tiger, tapir, and wild-hog shooting. Formerly they had flint points, quite identical
with those found in the Pfahlbauten. Hundreds of them are sometimes discovered
together on the sites of former settlements.

}


THE WILD INDIAN TRIBES OF THE MADEIRA VALLEY. 149

contrasted strangely with his former self-possession and impassibility.
With a very serious face, but with a sort of quiet politeness which I
could not but admire, the old man tried to make me understand that
these instruments, whose howling tone he imitated while marching
slowly and majestically round the burial-places, were used for their
lamentations over the dead, and could not be parted with like any
profane object. Such an exhibition of sentiment by a real naked
savage, in a real dense primeval forest, struck me indeed even more
than the solemn manner in which the announcement was delivered.*
I afterwards prevailed, with some difficulty, upon the same young
Caripuna to keep quiet for a few moments in one of the hammocks,
until I had drawn his profile. His hesitation did not seem to arise

from any superstitious fear—the “civilised” Tapuyos at Mandos were
far worse in this respect—but I fancy he simply thought it dull
work.

But the hour for parting came, when the whole tribe accompanied
us to the river-shore; the women carrying great quantities of mandioca-
roots, and heavy bundles of yellow and red maize in baskets suspended
on their backs by broad glossy stripes of bast, which passed over their
forehead. They carry their babies in similar contrivances slung across
their shoulders.

We parted evidently the very best of friends; and we were fully
confident that such attacks as our old mulatto hunter had spoken of
were not now likely to happen again. But we were the more disagreeably
surprised when we learned, on our return to Mandos, that the same
tribe had, only a few months afterwards, attacked the boat of a
Bolivian merchant, and had killed the proprietor and five of his
paddlers, while his wife, though badly wounded, had succeeded in

* Some years before J had witnessed a similar scene in the province of Parana, on
the shores of the Paranapanema, when the old Cayowa chieftain, Pahy (in the
Aldeamento de Santo Ignacio), on our taking leave of him, presented us with a fine
bow, adorned with toucan-feathers. I thanked him heartily, and, in acknowledgment
of his gift, assured him, with as serious a face as I could muster, that I always should
use it in war and in hunting, and remember him by it; but looking quite frightened,
he took the bow hastily from my hands, and, handling it like a sceptre, moved round
us with pompous measured strides, at the same time, with uplifted head, singing long-
drawn notes of ear and heartrending harmony. He could not be quieted until I had
promised, when I at last understood what he meant by some broken words in
Portuguese like ‘‘ Caga nao! Guerra nio! Amigo! Santo!” that we would ever keep
sacred the gift of our brown friends, and never soil it in war or hunting—a promise
which I can with good consvience declare we have always faithfully observed.



——

—

150 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

making her escape with the rest into one of the canoes, in which they
drifted down the river, instead of continuing their voyage upwards.
Without doubt, this had happened while the Bolivians were busy
dragging their boats over the rocks, when the dispersion of the crew
did not allow of any serious resistance. We could not ascertain
whether in this case any provocation on the Bolivian side had preceded
the outrage.* Behind the ‘“ padrao’s” back the paddlers might rouse
the wrath of the Indians, especially by brutal behaviour towards the
squaws, who are regarded with jealous eyes by very many tribes (not
by all, it is true); and their vengeance does not always fall exactly
upon the offenders, for the fury of the Indians then turns on all the
whites, and the innocent suffer in common with the guilty, even as
the settlers, to revenge an onslaught, will shoot down any red-skin
they can encounter.

Very often, what are trifles in our estimation are to them the springs
of fatal feuds. Thus, for example, a few years ago a Brazilio-Peruvian
expedition started for the purpose of determining the boundaries, under
the conduct of Captain José da Costa Azevedo, and was attacked by a
numerous troop of Indians on the Javary (an affluent of the Solimées,

* An incident that occurred in 1860, in the province of Parand, is too characteristic

to be omitted here, the more so as the facts were related to me by two of the principal
actors in the drama.

On the ruins of the former Jesuit Mission of Nossa Senhora de Loreto do Pirapé,
on the shores of the Paranapanema, the Brazilian Government had founded a colony
(or Aldeamento) of half-civilised Guarani Indians, and had confided it to the direction
of an old Portuguese major, one of whose legs had been stiffened for life by some
Miguelistic ball about forty years ago. The Guaranis had their cottages a little
apart from the Director’s house, which sheltered, besides himself, a white overseer,
six negroes, and four negresses. One day, quite unexpectedly, appeared a troop of
Coroados before it, about eighty men, women, and children. They seemed to be quite
peaceably inclined, received and gave little presents, and partook freely of a meal
served to them at the fire in the courtyard, until nightfall, when some of the squaws,
who had become more intimately acquainted with the negroes, laid their greedy hands
on their comfortable woollen jackets, and would not give them up. A general tumult
ensued, in which the Coroados advanced upon their enemies with the glowing
firebrands they had rashly seized. The impossibility of explaining themselves, the
Director’s want of pluck, and, above all, the deep aversion existing between blacks and
Indians, in spite of temporary friendships, could not but lead to a bloody crisis. One
of the elder blacks, the tall Ambrosio, had silently prepared his gun, and, at the
moment of the highest confusion, firing from behind a corner, shot the Indian chief
right through the head. Some of his friends had apparently only waited for such a
signal. Three more loaded guns with coarse shot were immediately fired into the
densest crowd. The effect was magical. The smoke had not yet quite disappeared,
when the Indians, silent as ghosts, had vanished, taking their wounded with them;
the dead chieftain alone was left lying close to the house ; and the expiring: fires shone



THE WILD INDIAN TRIBES OF THE MADEIRA VALLEY. 151

running along the frontier against Pert from the parallel of 10° 20°
of south latitude), because they had destroyed some of their primitive
bridges, that is, felled trees which lay across the river, to the obstruc-
tion of the passage of the boats. While they were dragging their
canoes over a shoal, an overpowering number of savages broke in upon
them with fearful yells.. The situation was a desperate one, their
ammunition having becn damped by the upsetting of a canoe on the
previous day. When at last they succeeded in getting their boats
afloat, the second in command, Lieutenant Soares Pinto, lay dying in
one of them, while, in another, the Peruvian commissary, Roldan,
writhed with pain from an arrow-shot in the leg, besides several of
the paddlers who were more or less wounded. After a dreadful voyage
of many days, they reached the steamer stationed at the mouth of the
Javary, which conveyed them to Manaos; but the poor Peruvian was
in such a state that the physicians thought amputation necessary, the
setting-in of gangrene being apprehended in this hot climate, and after
the sorry nursing he had received.

Another case, involving the guilt of both. parties,—the disregard of
human dignity on the one side, and treachery and barbarous violence

only on his grim features and the dismayed faces of.the Director and his blacks. They
retired speedily to the house, apprehending an attack at dawn of day; but morning
came without the Coroados: so, after having well searched the place, and, to their
surprise, discovered that the Indians had taken away, during the night, the body of
their dead chief from under the very windows, they all crossed the river—there about
600 yards wide; for the Coroados are indifferent boatmen, and could not easily pursue
them. ‘The Guaranis of the settlement, who until now had scrupulously kept aloof
from the whole affair, followed their leaders, and a few days afterwards had to sustain
a bold attack of their hereditary enemies the Coroados ; the Major and his men having
already left the place for Curitiba, the capital of the province, where, after a strict
investigation, he was dismissed; and Ambrosio, the white overseer, and one of the
blacks, were sent to prison for many months. In the skirmish on the shores of the
Paranapanema, the gentle Guaranis, with the aid of a few fire-arms and swords, got
the better of their bold assailants. We afterwards brought over one of their trophies,
the skull of a Coroado woman, which showed a deep sabre-cut. It is now in the
collection of skulls belonging to the Medical Faculty at Freiburg, in the Breisgau.

In almost every case of bloodshed between the white and the red men, it has been
found that the latter would not be molested on their hunting-grounds by the white
intruders, or that they were refused the indemnification they asked for them. Twenty
and more years ago, before the law was in force which gave to the Government all
tracts of land the titles to the possession of which could not be proved, every estanciero,
or cattle breeder, in the thinly-peopled Southern provinces longed for new campos
for his increasing herds. One of them, living near the Passo Fundo, on the
Uruguay, discovered a magnificent prairie, capable of pasturing thousands of cows,
which was divided from the older possessions by a tract of forest some miles wide
only. It was a perfect godsend; and the estanciero forthwith set about opening a



152 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

on the other,—is this:—When the brave English traveller Chandless,
whom we had the pleasure of meeting at Mandos, explored the Puris
in 1865, his servant, an Italian, informed him on the way that he
had decided on not accompanying him farther up, and that he was
going to return alone to the Amazon Valley. Chandless, who knew
his man well, and who guessed rightly that it was not so much the
increasing hardship of the voyage as the desire to make a good bargain
for the Indian children a little lower down the river which caused this
sudden resolve, tried to dissuade him from his purpose, but in vain !
He went, and—neyer reached the Amazon. His master, on his return,
found pieces of his canoe near an Indian malocca on the shore, and
there heard the particulars of the horrible tale. The Italian had, imme-
diately upon his arrival, begun bargaining for an Indian boy, and had
at last purchased him for a hatchet; but, as he was conveying him to
his canoe, the child began to scream piteously ; upon which his mother,
running up, rescued him, and would not give him up. H ereupon the
Italian demanded his hatchet back, but was haughtily refused. A short
skirmish ensued and the white man was killed, and, I suppose, roasted
and devoured.

way to the new campo for the transport thither of a few head of cattle, without
heeding in the least the protest of a horde of Coroados who had been in the habit
of visiting him from time to time, and with whom he had always been on a friendly
footing.

When the Indians saw that their old hunting-ground, the abode of numerous
herds of stags and deer, was lost to them, they demanded an indemnity first of five,
and at last of two, Spanish ounces (about £15); but they got for answer nothing but
a sneer and hard words. They tried several times to block up the new path by
felled trees ; but, as they saw that the negroes of the estancia removed the obstruction
with less trouble than they took to make it, they seemed to give up the task, and did
not appear for some time.

However, when the young animals of the new herd were to be counted, and to be
branded with the mark of the estancia—a festive occasion, on which the proprietor and
all his family went to a light house erected on the new possession—the Coroados
made their appearance again, and were kindly received by the master, in spite of
warnings from his subordinates. He offered the chieftain a piece of roast-meat, and,
upon his request for a knife, handed to him his own dagger-like one, which was stuck
in his girdle, after the fashion of the place ; whereupon the Indian, with a movement
quick as lightning, drove it into his chest up to the very handle; and, as if this were
a concerted signal, a crowd of armed Coroados poured in from all sides, and, after
a short resistance, killed eight white people, women and children included. Only
one boy of fourteen years old escaped by a window; and he, throwing himself on
one of the horses without, spread the horrible news. In an expedition undertaken
by the neighbours to avenge the murder, a few Indians were killed; but the greater
part of them escaped, and retired farther into the interior of the forests, °

Another bloody encounter—let us hope the last—occurred in 1862, in the so-called

a oe



THE WILD INDIAN TRIBES OF THE MADEIRA VALLEY. 1538

But to return to the Indians of the Madeira. The most dangerous
footpads on its whole course are a tribe whose real name even is not
known, scarcely any individual of whom has been distinetly seen, yet
who do not allow the traveller to breathe freely until their domain is
passed. Searcely a year gocs by without one of their bold well-
calculated surprises, or the treacherous murder of some traveller, or
Mojos Indian from the Missions, descending the river to gather cacao.
They seem to live chiefly near the confluence of the Mamoré and the
Guaporé, along the shores of the latter to the old fort of Principe da
Beira, and on the campos east of the Mamoré towards the Itonama.
Not even the best gun is of any use against them, as the sharpest eye
cannot penetrate to their well-chosen ambushes behind the dense boughs,
whence their never-erring arrows are always the first to proclaim their
presence. Jfence the only possible protection against them are light
cuirasses of hard leather, or other stout stuff, such as were worn by the
Portuguese troops not many years ago in their combats with the

Jotocudos on the Rio Doce. But who will ever think of putting on
such things in that climate without the risk of absolute and immediate
danger ?*

The Indians of the old Missions, most exposed to them by reason of
their frequent voyages on the rivers, live in constant dread of them ;
and around the fires of our Mojos every evening might be heard

Sertio de Guarapuava—that is, the immense wooded region extending west of this
little town to the shores of the Parané, and even farther on. An enterprising
Paulista had settled there in the face of all warnings, and, by constant vigilance
and cautious behaviour, had, for six years, held the Coroados, his neighbours, at
a respectful distance. One day there appeared a large troop of them before the
palisades with which he had encircled his house, clamorously demanding Indian corn,
and trying to force their way in after they had been refused; and in the contest that
ensued, one of them was killed by the son of the proprietor of the house. In a
renewed attack some time afterwards, a great number were shot by the Brazilians,
who were well protected-by their palings against the arrows of the Indians. They
were again obliged to retire, and were not heard of for years, though one or other
of the Brazilians, who never failed to keep a sharp look-out, even while working in
the fields, swore he had seen some lurking in the bushes.

Some years after this, a son-in-law of the old Paulista, having bought the
produce of a corn-plantation a few miles off, belonging to the military colony of Chagu,
just then given up by the Government, went there with wife and children and some of
his brothers-in-law, eleven persons in all. It was the moment of revenge so long
awaited by the Coroados! None of them ever returned; their corpses were found
lying near the burnt cottages.

* Dr. Eiras, from Rio de Janeiro, has already been meutioned as one of their
victims in 1869.



154 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

whispered tales of their horrid decds. Several times the savages
attacked and killed the soldiers while fishing in the Guaporé, near
the fort of Principe da Beira, nay, under its very guns, though these
are by no means so formidable as might be supposed;* and the com-
manding officer had to prohibit such excursions, save in sufficient
numbers and under due precautionary arrangements. The Bolivian
traders would annihilate the whole tribe without any scruple, if they
could. More than once, they have tried to get up a general insur-
rection, and have invited the commander of Principe da Beira to take
part in it; but, even if he had consented (which he could not without
acting against the clear wishes of his Government), its success would
have been very doubtful. As it is now, the son of the forest has
decidedly the upper hand, and scarcely ever gets what he deserves for
his murders; but, twenty or thirty years hence, perhaps the tables
will be turned, and then will ensue what happens everywhere when
the white race and the red get to close quarters. Every stroke of the
settler’s axe will be as a nail driven into the coffin of the native; for,
at every such stroke, he will be thrust farther away from the main
sources of his life—the principal rivers and the hunting-grounds near

* It is almost incomprehensible that the Brazilians should abandon to decay a fort
which the Portuguese built with so much trouble and expense (in 1780), and which, in
case of war with Bolivia, would be of great importance. Well-informed Brazilians have
told me that the soldiers of the garrison not only pulled out the strong cramp-irons of
the parapets, but also stripped the chapel of all its rich wood-carvings, in order to get
at the nails, &e., which they gave to Bolivian traders for brandy. The doors of the
fort still are scrupulously shut every night, especially since the soldiers, with the aid of
a hill of rubbish situate against the wall, are not impeded by them in their nightly
visits to the brown beauties living outside in their frail palm cottages; but certainly
not one of the heavy guns, whose transport up the Madeira and Guaporé must have
been no light work, is ready for use. It is no idle boast of the Bolivians, who, sneering
at the harmless monsters marked with the escutcheon of the Braganzas, vow they will
have the old fort by means of a single barrel of cachaca (sugar-brandy) ; upon which
provocation the black defenders, proudly exhibiting their blunderbusses, swear they
will with them open such a fire on the Castelhanos that there shall be no need of the
artillery. However, such is the dependence of the fort on Bolivia for its supply of
provisions that it would be the easiest thing in the world to starve it out in the event
of war.

All the little forts on the southern and south-eastern borders of the realm were in
similar condition at tho time of the war with Paraguay ; indeed, in all South America
there is not a single fortress which at all answers to modern requirements, not
excluding the renowned Humaité itself, whose chief strength lay in the deep swamps
surrounding it. With the exceedingly high wages of workmen, and the great difficulty
of getting a sufficient number of them to such distant places, iron forts made in Kurope
would be advisable—one near Santo Antonio, on the Madeira, and another near the
mouth of the Beni or the Mamoré.


THE WILD INDIAN TRIBES OF THE MADEIRA VALLEY. 155

them; and, as soon as the shrill whistle of the locomotive shall sound
through the clearing, and proud steamers rock on the rivers, he will
be totally undone. He never will submit readily to the entire aban-
donment of his old ways, and never will take to agriculture, an
employment which he despises as belonging to the lot of his humble
enslaved wives, unless he be compelled to adopt it, or unless he be
brought up to it by patient degrees, with a combination of paternal
kindness and unswerving firmness. The unalterable course of his
thoughts ever will be that he had a better claim to the soil on the
ground of priority of residence, and that it was asking too much of
him to change his mode of life in favour of the intruders; and the
white man (I mean the settler, the uneducated man) will always look
haughtily down on the brown “animal,” and will be only too happy
to execute his mandate: “Get hence to make room for me and my
family!’ A violent contest, carried on from both sides with treacherous*
weapons, must ensue; but its end cannot be doubted, and another nation
will soon have ceased to exist.

An intelligent Guarani Indian of the Aldeamento of San Ignacio,
on the Paranapanema, once asked me: ‘‘ Why do not the white people
leave us undisturbed in our forests? Why are we to live like them ?
Is there not room enough for us all?” And what could I reply? He
would easily have refuted any sentimental talk about the blessings of
civilisation by simply pointing to the importation of the measles, just
then decimating his village; and it would have been cruel to insist
upon the naked truth that by the highest right in the world, the right
of might, we should in time drive them to still greater extremities.
The schoolmaster-like advice, to keep on good terms with the white
man for his own benefit, was all I could give the honest fellow. To
sum up our observations on the future of the South American Indians,
we may briefly note that, whenever they have come into contact with
the white race, their doom has been sealed. Like their more energetic
northern brethren, they are visited with physical and moral destruction ;

* If a tale we heard on the Rio da Pomba (an affluent of the Parahyba) be true,
the palm of treachery must be conceded to the white race. Planters who had been
oceasionally troubled by little thefts committed by the Indians, but who, otherwise,
lived in peace with the numerous hordes of the vicinity, had the woollen jackets and
blankets of their negroes, who had been swept off in an outbreak of small-pox, carried
into the woods. In accordance with the design, the effect on the Indians, who of course
availed themselves of the clothing, was terrific. Nearly the whole tribe was destroyed.



156 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

the rate of which can be retarded only by founding aldcamentos after
the plan of the former Missions, but with the condition that less care
be paid to the religious, and more to the agricultural and industrial,

element.

CARIPUNA INDIAN HUNTING.

It is impossible to overestimate the civilising influence which
might especially be exercised over the women by a kindly active lady,
versed in the several branches of household industry, and which would
thus get diffused through them over the whole community. In every


THE WILD INDIAN TRIBES OF THE MADEIRA VALLEY. 157

village, in fact, there should be a female teacher for the long-neglected
squaws. A new generation would then arise, which, if not endowed
with the energy and activity of the European population, would at
least become tolerable neighbours to it; and by amalgamation with
which, in process of time, it might contribute to the formation of a
stable race adapted to the climate.

To many it may appear that such mixed races bear in themselves
the germs of destruction, nature generally having a tendency to return
to the pure types; but closer observation of the present (so-called) white
population of the northern provinces of Pernambuco, Ceara, Parahyba
do Norte, Maranhao, and Para, will clearly show that so much of the
Indian element has survived there that more than one-third, or a fourth
part, of the whole population must be ascribed to it. Even if it be
more and more diminished by increasing immigration, and should it at
last be discernible only by an experienced eye, yet there it is, and it
has been the means of profit to the thinly-peopled country; and surely
no one will assert that the black-haired, dark-eyed mestizoes of these
countries are less fit to live and work under the glowing rays of the
tropical sun than the fair sons of the North.

However, I am still far from joining in the unwarrantable lamen-
tations of novel-writers over the impending extinction of a mythical
red race, far superior to the white in heroic virtues and noble qualities
of heart. Such a red race exists only in their imaginations. The
indolent, sensual, and sometimes treacherous race of real life will and
must give way to the growing exigencies of over-peopled Europe. The
titles of possession enjoyed by the antochthon, important as they may
be in his own narrow and childish judgment, are abolished in the
Court of Appeal which takes cognisance of the wider needs of the
world. And to ultra-sentimentalists of the novelist type I should like
to put this query: ‘Is not the prosperity of the family of some hard-
working scttler, trying with the sweat of his brow to create a new
home for his children and his grand-children, of more importance than
the comforts of a set of savages, with which that prosperity might
possibly interfere?” Moreover, by way of justifying this complete
extrusion of an unwilling race, a really higher civilisation, in the form
of agriculture and regular industry, should replace the hitherto pre-
valent system of wild robbery; the hidden treasures of the country
should be explored for the benefit of mankind at large, and the last



158 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

traces of that narrow Spanish-Portuguese system of destruction, which
took only its own ego and the immediate span of time into considera-
tion, must for ever disappear. In the United States, we may well
wait patiently for the completion of this process, which draws to a
close with the inflexible rigidity of a law of nature. There the waves
of immigration already touch the foot of the Rocky Mountains. There
the wigwam is destroyed to make room for the railway station or the
streets of nascent cities, and Indian savagery and modern culture,
unable to exist side by side, must daily come to bloody conflicts. But
in the South American States, in Brazil especially, which owns pro-
vinees, with a population of only 40,000, larger than Germany, all hands,
be their number never so small, should be turned to account, parti-
cularly as the bulk of European emigration is not likely to turn in
that direction for the-present. The association of the Brazilian Tndians
with useful communities in aldeamentos, on a larger scale, is also
favoured by the consideration that their character, on the whole more
gentle and peaceable than that of the North American Indians, does
not offer insuperable obstacles to earnest and persevering attempts.
What the speculating spirit of the Jesuits conceived and brought about,
should we despair of achieving through the agency of a Government
animated by higher views ?

One of the chief difficulties of such an undertaking is, as already
mentioned, the great number of South American idioms: and jt must
be reckoned a capital idea of the Jesuits that their missionaries, instead
of teaching Spanish to their Indians—which would have turned that
way the torrent of European adventure—did all they could to make
the Guarani language, the richest and most flexible of those idioms,
the prevailing tongue. Though they may not have been quite suc-
cessful, yet the Guarani has spread, through their labours, over an
exceedingly wide range; and, to the present day, there are many
Guarani words in the language of the ordinary population of Brazil
(quite independently of their colour and descent), and at places where
Guarani was not the language of the autochthons,

As to the language of the Caripunas, Martius gives a short voca-
bulary of it from which I take the following :—

Water, oni passna. Head, mapo.
Tree, jud. Waterfall, saschu tschama.
Bow, cannatz. Knife, mand pacea.


THE WILD INDIAN TRIBES OF THE MADEIRA VALLEY. 159

Teeth, seta: Arrow, piia.

God, oard. Moon, ursche.
Day, sabaka. Tapir, au ana.
Sun, daart. Dog, tschaspa.
Son, waka. Stag, tschasst.
Daughter, jussawaks. Tiger, Laman.
Madeira river, AZunnu. Alligator, kapuena.
River, énne. 1, aares.

White man, cariba tschiki. 2, eranbue.

Fire, tschii. 3, kimischd.
To die, maki. eranbué nardbue.
? ?
He has died, nata mak. mucken tina.
7 3

nN

On

We should have much liked to ascertain whether our friends the
Caripunas have the same mode of conveying their thoughts as the
Coroados in Parand, especially as the “written rocks” of the Madeira
seem to be beyond their comprehension now. In the immense primeval
forests extending between the Ivahy and the Paranapanema, the Parana
and the Tibagy, the rich hunting-grounds of numerous Coroado hordes,
one frequently encounters, chiefly near forsaken palm-sheds, a strange
collection of objects hung up between the trees on thin cords or cipds,
such as little pieces of wood, feathers, bones, and the claws and jaws
of different animals.

In the opinion of those well versed in Indian lore, these hieroglyphs
are designed as epistles to other members of the tribe, regarding the
produce of the chase, the number and stay of the huntsmen, domestic
intelligence, and the like; but this strange kind of composition,
reminding one of the quippos (knotted cords) of the old Peruvians, has
not yet been quite unravelled, though it is desirable that it should be,
for the naive son of the woods also uses it sometimes in his intercourse
with the white man.

Settlers in these countries, on going in the morning to look after
their very primitive mills near their cottages, have frequently discovered
them going bravely, but bruising pebbles instead of the maize grains,
while on the floor of the open shed the names and purposes of the
unwelcome nocturnal. visitors have been legibly written in the sand.
Among the well-drawn zigzag lines were inserted the magnificent long
tail-feathers of the red and blue macaw, which are generally used by the
Coroados for their arrows; and, as these are the symbols of war and
night-attacks, the whole was probably meant for a warning and
admonition ad hominem: “Take up your bundle and go, or beware of our
arrows |”



ee

meee:

160 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

On the Iguassti, one of the mighty affluents of the Parana, there still
are a few wild, little-known tribes living side by side with the sparse
population of civilised cattle breeders. The German colonists of
Blumenau, their eastern neighbours, include them under the Portuguese
name of Bugres, while the Brazilians falsely call them Botocudos.

Driven into straits upon all sides, and particularly averse to friendly
intercourse with the white race, they retire farther and farther; and, as
the progress of cultivation deprives them of one tract of wood or rich
campo after another, they protest in their own fashion, either by a sudden
night-attack or by one of these puzzling proclamations. Thus, a few
years ago, when the Iguassti was getting a little livelier with trade, they
set up a long bamboo in a conspicuous spot on its shore, with a big
bundle of feathers, bones, &c., waving at the top like a huge scarecrow.
Unfortunately the floods had carried all off some time before we passed
there, and so we were deprived of the pleasure of trying our wits at the
strange riddle.

In the same drastic way, in ages long gone by, the nations of Asia
must have written their first letters, until the palpable symbols were
supplanted by images and signs, which in their turn were replaced by
syllables and letters with the higher gifted races and tribes.

If by the words of Goethe—

‘So wird erst nach und nach die Sprache fest gerammelt.
Und was ein Volk zusammen sich gestammelt,
Muss ewiges Gesetz fiir Herz und Seele sein,”

the sounds are meant in the first place, yet the process of slow “ fest
rammeln” is the same for the written language; and those first
“stammerings”’ of any nation are not devoid of interest.

Are not the sounds and the visible signs for them so closely linked
that it seems as if a language cannot rise beyond a certain degree of
development if the letters do not come to its aid? The American
languages, above all, cause such thoughts to arise. They all are poly-
synthetical, that is, formed by agglutination, or a loose adding of
formal elements to the word-root.

Martius says, in the Portuguese preface to his “Vocabulary of
Brazilian Languages:”’—“ The monosyllable or bisyllable radical words
of these languages are loosely put together to express a more or less
complicated notion. Yet, in all of them, are missing the flexions



THE WILD INDIAN TRIBES OF THE MADEIRA VALLEY. 161

which are intended to convey the thought easily and clearly in all its
sharpness and logical power to the spirit of the hearer. These flexions
are substituted by certain particles,* that express the most necessary
grammatical and syntactical notions. Of course they are less apt for
the purpose; and these idioms cannot possess the beauty and precision
of more civilised languages. While in the latter these flexions and
composed words appear (so to say) as the results of an organic process,
as a spontaneous emanation of the spirit, showing the laws regulating
the course of ideas already in the construction of the sentences; the
polysynthetical languages, on the contrary, having nothing of the kind,
appear only as a loosely-joined conglomeration of words. This in-
flexibility and poverty characterize all the Indian languages of Brazil,
even the Guarani, and the Lingoa geral do Brazil, or Tupi, which
has arisen from it under the influence of the Jesuits; so that the
eulogies lavished on it by the old missionaries seem to be applicable
rather to its phonetic character than to its construction.”

Thus far the excellent German linguist and botanist. At the end
of his treatise he proposes the erection of schools for instruction in
the Tupi language, thinking that thereupon the greater part of the
native population, or rather the half-civilised descendants of the autoch-
thons, would not regard the white men as strangers and intruders
any longer, and would join them in larger numbers. Well-meaning
wishes! If I conjecture aright, Brazilian statesmen must have thought:
“Tf we but had schools for our own descendants! In a short time
the last remains of the natives will, notwithstanding all our efforts,
have vanished, and the low degree of civilisation to which they were
capable of advancing by their own unaided efforts certainly did not
warrant bright hopes of them!” So it is always the same vicious
circle. They are not helped because they do not progress ; and they do
not progress because they are not helped.

* The following passage is taken from the Introduction to the ‘Tesora de la lengua
Guarani, que se usa en el Pert, Paraguay y Rio de la Plata. Por el P. Antonio
Ruiz (de Montoya) de la Compaiia de Jesus. Madrid: J. Sanchez. 1639.” ‘

“Among the chief difficulties of this language are the particles, many of which
have no meaning by themselves, but only when joined to some other word, be it
entire or maimed by the composition. For this reason there are no particular forms
for the verb, which is conjugated by the particles: A, ere, 0, ya, na, pee, and sus
pronouns—che, nde, &e. The verb, embod, e¢.g., is composed by the particles, 7é,
md, and e. Né is reciprocal; mé is an active particle; and e means cleverness,
aptitude; the whole together meaning to exercise, to learn. ‘I learn’ is expressed.
by A fiémboé.”

M



a em
—

ee

162 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

However, when we judge of the civilisation, or rather of the
aptitude for it, of the South American Indian tribes, particularly of
those in the valleys of the Amazon, the Parana, and the Paraguay,
we must not forget the impossibility of their achieving per saltwm the
ereat advance from a life of wild fishers and hunters to a life of cattle-
breeders, in the midst of those endless forests, and in the total
absence of domestic animals comparable with our cattle. When we
remember that the semi-cultured condition of a great part of Asia,
and of some parts of Africa, is based entirely on the existence of

For the benefit of readers particularly interested in Guarani, I here add a dialogue
on Christian Doctrine, as it was taught two hundred years ago in the Spanish Jesuit

Missions :—

Priest. How ought a man to behave in
this world to free himself from hell
and to get into heaven ?

Pupil. We must believe in God, be chris-
tened, and follow his commandments.

Priest. Is there a God ?

Put. There is.

Priest. Do you believe in this God ?

Pupil. I do.

Priest. Who is God?

Pupil. He who has created all things.

Priest. How has he created all things ?

Pupil. Only by his word.

Priest. Has God a body like us ?

Put. He has not.

Priest. Has God ever had a beginning ?

Pupil. He has not.

Priest. Was he from eternity ?

Pupil. He was.

Priest. Will he be for ever?

Pupil. For ever.

Priest. Where is God?

Pupil. In heaven. On earth there is no
place where he is not.

Priest. Can one see God ?

Pupil. One cannot.

Priest. Why ?

Puyl. Because he has no body.

Priest. Where can one see him ?

Pupil. In heaven. When we get there
we shall see him.

Priest. And those in hell will not see
him ?

Pupil. By no means.

Priest. Why not?

Puml. On account of their sins. &ce.

Maré oicobope acé icé ara pube anhan
garata cii onhe pysyré pota ybaky pe
olere raco ucar?

Tupa rerobiar inhe mom garay pa; Tupa
nhe énga rupi oicobo.

Oicobepe Tupa ?

Oicobe.

Pererobiarpe aé Tupi ?

Arobiar.

Mbaé Tupa ?

Opacatii mbaé tetirua monhang ara.

Mbaé pupe Tupa opacati tetirua oimon-
hang?

Inheenga pupe nhote.

Cetepe Tupa acgei abé ?

Nacetei.

Ni y py pe eri mbaé Tupa?

Niy py i.

Ceco abanhe pe cecoi?

Ceco abanhe.

Aujera manhepe gecoi?

Aujeramanhe — ne,

Umamepe Tupa rece ?

Ybaky pe, yby pe noico mbaé amo cecoa-
béyma.

Ki catupe ace ykebe Tupa repiaca?

Ndey catui.

Maranamope ?

Cete — éy m — nhe.

Mamepe acéo gepiak — ne?

Ybaky pe iande coreme — ogepiaky ne.

Anhangara tape 0 ¢o mbaé rama ndo —
cepiak — xoerene ?

Ndocgepiak.

Maranamope ?

Inhéenya abyagoéra repyranmo. &c.

isin sglaasStea =|



THE WILD INDIAN TRIBES OF THE MADEIRA VALLEY. 163

different domestic animals, and how the Zulu Caffre, despite his negro
brutality, seems a Croesus with his fat herds, when compared with the
Indian who depends on his luck in the chase, the primitive immobility of
the latter is not so very incomprehensible, even if we altogether disregard
the difference of race.

The only animal fit to become domestic, of all the rich fauna of
Southern America, is the tapir; but its habit of isolation may be a
difficulty in its cultivation.

The all-stifling luxuriance of tropical vegetation, against which man
is quite helpless without iron implements, was, at least in the densely-
wooded valleys of the Amazon and the Parana, and of the innumerable
smaller affluents of the Atlantic, one of the chief obstacles in the way of
development; and, if at the time of the Conquest the Indians of the
Pampas also were on the same low level as their cousins of the wooded
regions, the reason must be sought in the afore-mentioned want of
domestic animals, which did not suffer them to live otherwise than by
fishing or hunting, and the scanty produce of their very primitive
and limited agriculture. The intermediate connecting link of cattle-
breeding, that, since the introduction of European cattle, has acquired
so high an importance in these countries, was then totally missing;
and without it there was no possibility of getting on for a not very
highly gifted race.

The religious notions of all these nations cannot be very exalted ;
and, moreover, it is an extremely difficult task to make them out.
Besides the difficulties of the language and the difference of individual
convictions, the Indians sometimes take a sort of malicious pleasure in
wilfully misleading troublesome questioners; and the missionaries, both
the old and the modern ones, who might have been expected to pay
special attention to this matter, have always treated their poor, childish
religious fables with scorn and disdain. On the whole, it seems as if the
Indians belonging to the great Tupi family had somewhat better notions
in this respect; and part of the early success of the missionaries was
owing, perhaps, to their innate awe of a mysterious spiritual world, and
of the priests mediating between it and them.

‘The Coroados, whom I have so frequently mentioned, though i in many
respects above other tribes, seem to be almost void of religious feelings,
certainly according to the judgment of our good old friend Frei Timotheo
do Castello Novo, Director of the Aldeamento Sao Pedro d’Alcantara.

M2



164 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

With a pitying shrug of the shoulders, and meaning it, perhaps, as an
apology for his own rather passive conduct, he narrated to us the
shocking story of a Coroado with loud voice once asking him, during
mass, for a plate of farinha! | “ Since that time,” added the grey-bearded
father, with a melancholy smile, ‘I have been rather disenchanted, and
have refrained from asking my savages to hear mass.’ But even this
matter-of-fact nation of Coroades I cannot believe to have no religion at
all; and the question whether there are any such nations at all seems to
be an open one still, and likely to remain so for some time.

Even the Tupi tribes have no kind of religious service; and, what-
ever their ideas on the surrounding Nature and the reasons of its phe-
nomena may be, they certainly do not rise above the childish notions of
demoniac powers, hostile rather than friendly, which may be conjured
and rendered harmless by their Pajés, or charm-doctors. These sly
impostors, who sometimes may delude themselves into believing at least
in their sacred mission, if not in the infallibility of their medicines,
play quite a conspicuous part with all the independent Indian tribes ;
and it even seems as if the awe within which they know how to
shroud themselves was shared by the Portuguese-speaking mestizoes
and zamboes.

As with the Shamans of the North-Asiatic nations, the influence a
Pajé may secure over his tribe depends entirely on the success of his
cures and his more or less imposing personal qualities. Woe to him
if by some unlucky ministration or fatal advice he forfeits his prestige.
The hate of the whole tribe turns against him, as if to indemnify them
for the fear and awe felt by them until then; and often he pays for his
envied position with his life.

And an influential and powerful position it is. His advice is first
heard in war and peace. He has to mark the boundaries of the hunting-
grounds; and, when quarrels arise, he has to decide in concert with the
chieftain, sometimes even against the latter’s wishes. By a majestically
distant demeanour, and by the affectation of severe fasting and of nightly
meetings with the spirits of another world, these augurs have succeeded
in giving such an appearance of holiness to the whole caste, that their
influence is a mighty one to the present day; even with the Indians of
the Aldeamentos, where contact with the white race is sure by-and-by
to produce a certain degree of scepticism.

When I was at the Aldeamento of San Ignacio, on the Paranapanema,

a



THE WILD INDIAN TRIBES OF THE MADETRA VALLEY. 165

Cuyaba, chieftain and Pajé of an independent horde of Cayowé Indians,
made his appearance; and I had the honour of being introduced to
this magnificent sample of a conjurer. Te was aman of about fifty,
with large, well-cut features, framed within a dense, streaming mane of
long black hair. The long xerimbité on his under lip (a long, thin
cylinder of a resin resembling amber), a great number of black and
white beads, covering his chest in regular rows like a cuirass, and a
broad girdle holding his cheripa (sort of apron), which was fringed
all round with rich woven ornaments, gave him quite a stately, majestic
appearance,

Though he had never seen white men before,—the few officials of the
Aldeamento being all more or less ‘amulatados,” that is, showing the
mulatto type,—and though our expedition could not but interest him in
more ways than one, he did not deign to show the least surprise, or
anything like it, and on our invitation took a seat at our table with such
a quietly supercilious self-possession that we ourselves nearly forgot the
nil admirart and our duties as hosts.

In an interview he had with the Director of the Aldcamento,
who wished him to leave his forests and to join the whites, who had
plenty of knives, hatchets, salt, and even powder and lead, and among
whom only polygamy was prohibited, he owned,—gravely nodding his
head and repeating over and over again, “Mesmo, mesmo” (“ Likewise,
likewise,” used affirmatively), which had already gained for him the nick-
name of “Capitao Likewise,”—that what the white capitio had said
as to the power and riches of the white men was all right and true;
and that even polygamy had its disadvantages; but that, nevertheless,
on account of his people he preferred remaining in the woods, and
coming only occasionally to the Aldeamento to trade with his white
friends. “Yes; and to pilfer this and that,” was savagely whispered
into my ear by the Director, who had now, for the third or fourth
time, been baffled in his attempts at “civilising” the sly fellow.
“Whenever he comes here,” he assured me, “I have to send a few
spies after him, if I don’t wish him, or his worse set of women, to
take away an axe, or a knife, or even a gun to his canoe, in addition
to the little bag of salt I always present him with.”

“What do you think the rogue did some time ago, in the Aldea-
mento of Sao Pedro d’Alcantara, on the Tibagy? He knew that one
of the Cayowd Indians there, one of his own tribe, was possessed of



166 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS,

an excellent axe, not one of those imported ones, which are useless
with hard wood, but a good solid one made in our own country. To get
this axe was the subject of Cuyaba’s dreams both by day and by night.
By a clever use of all his worldly and spiritual authority, and with
an eloquence he knows how to display in the right place, in spite of
his usual curtness, he contrived to make the poor fellow promise to
hand over to him the coveted weapon, on the condition of the Great
Spirit, moved by Cuyaba’s intercession, granting him an interview
for the purpose of initiating him into all the mysteries of Pajéism.
After a course of preparatory ceremonies, severe fasts, and mortifica-
tious, to which the zealous neophyte submitted with patient readiness,
Cuyabé informed him that the great day had arrived, on which
he was to recite the prayers and magical words he had been taught,
from sunrise unto sunset, on a particular spot in the forest, with
strict observance of the rule of abstinence from both food and drink.
He should then be certainly favoured with the presence of the
mighty Spirit, who would reveal to him the most wonderful things:
but he, Cuyaba, must have the hatchet before the arrival of that great
moment, as urgent business (Government affairs probably) called him
thence.”

With the earnestness of profound faith, the honest youth took
up his position on the appointed spot, from early dawn until the
beams of the setting sun gilded the tree-crowns around him and the
returning parrot-flocks filled the valley with their shrill cries. His
prayers and supplications became louder and more ardent from hour to
hour; but the Great Spirit did not reveal itself to his w sary eyes,
So at last he returned sadly and slowly to his cottage, there to learn
that the old impostor had left the settlement with his wives and—the
hatchet of course, and was now far beyond his reach; his complaints
to the Director being of no avail, as the old humbug never returned
to Sao Pedro d’Alcantara.

He had more legitimate claims, however, on ,the gratitude “of the
best of his time and tribe” than this conjuring & Ja Cagliostro.

The Director had once witnessed his cure of a bad case of rhen-
matism. Singing aloud his exorcisms, and shaking the maracd* (whose

* The maraca is a sacred instrument, much resembling a child’s rattle, used only
by the Pajés and chieftains on solemn occasions. It simply consists of a gourd, with



ewe Ce

YHE WILD INDIAN TRIBES OF THE MADEIRA VALLEY. 167

sound is said to be especially disagreeable to the ears of the bad spirit
Jurupari), Cuyabé danced round his patient, a young Indian, the while
smoking a cigar of immense size and of peculiarly miraculous potency,
whose smoke he blew into the sufferer’s face and over his naked body.
Presently he began to stroke and shampoo him from top to toe with such
wild energy, that in a short time the perspiration poured in streams
down his own and the patient’s limbs. After he had, by a steady
course of stroking from the middle to the extremities, pretended to
concentrate the disease in his fingers and toes, like one of our jugglers,
he pulled it out with a sudden wrench, put it into his own mouth,
and swallowed it with fearful grimaces. He then declared the sick
man to be cured ; and, as the latter without any doubt felt some
relief after all that kneading and perspiring, the Indian public at
large was more than ever convinced of the efficacy of the huge cigar,
the maraca, and the magical words, and of Cuyaba’s power over
diseases and evil spirits.

I mentioned the xerimbita as an integral part of Cuyaba’s costume.
It is a cylinder of from 5 to 6 inches in length, made of the trans-
parent yellow resin of the jatahy-tree, inserted into a thin bamboo
tube. It is polished afterwards, pointed at one end, and provided
with a small horizontal piece at the other, which secures it in the
perforated under lip.

This barbarous ornament, though in that form and of that material
we found it only with the Cayow4 Indians of the province of Parana,
must not be omitted in a description of the Amazon basin some 1,200
miles further off; for on the shores of the Mamoré, on a hill called
the Cerrito, near the site of the former Mission of Exaltacton,
three white quartz xerimbités of about two inches in length have
been found, identical with some of the same material fished out of the
Tibagy near Sao Pedro d’ Alcantara.

On this Cerrito, an elevation well suited for a settlement, as in times
of extraordinary high floods it rises like a lonely island out of the wide-
spreading muddy waters (and which at present is inhabited by a clever
and active Brazilian, Senhor Antonio de Barros Cardozo; to whom we
and the leader of a former expedition, Lieutenant Gibbon, are alike

an ornamented handle, filled with pebbles, and always reminded me (I beg the
pardon of all good Catholics) of the holy-water sprinkler of the Roman Church. Like
that, it is indispensable for the expulsion of evil spirits.



indebted), the showers have washed out, besides the heavy stone
xerimbitas,* a great many fragments of old earthen pots, ornamented in

|
168 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS,

their interiors with simple undulating lines.
If we must regard the easily made resin xerimbitds as the unmistak-

able evidences of a particular tribe, how much more the stone ornaments,
which must have taken a deal of time and trouble to finish? And the
circumstance of their being found in regions so widely apart from each

other confirms the hypothesis of a once wider range of the Tupi tribes, or
testifies to the extent of their victorious expeditions. All the members
of the tribe most probably did not wear these quartz xerimbitas, but only
the chiefs and the Pajés, who to the present day pride themselves on
the particular length of them. One of the Cayowd Indians of San
Ignacio once told me, with evident signs of a deep-felt awe, that some
holy men (santos) were living in the far interior of the forests, who
were distinguished from other mortals by the unwonted size of their
xerinbitas.

Might not such holy personages have used the hard quartz in past
“heroic” periods; and might not these time-defying signs of their
dignity still be found, in large numbers, near their places of worship, not
unlike our own Druid temples ?

As for the multitude of earthen fragments found on the Cerrito,
evidently an old Indian settlement and burial-ground, they may have
their origin in the custom of breaking the earthen pots at funerals, even
as our own ancestors are said to have done in prehistoric times.
Nowhere in any of the present Indian Aldeamentos, though the women
there bake the pots just as they did ages ago (but where many of the

| rites may have fallen into disuse), did I see such a quantity of broken
vessels accumulated as on that hill on the Mamoré. But the white

man has long appropriated to himself the old burial-ground or sanctuary.
Dense cacao plantations cover its foot, while on the summit the juice of
the sugar-cane is boiled under large open sheds, or meat is cut in thin
long slices and dried in the sun. Already a small steamer ploughs the

ee

yellow riyer, and soon its impatient puffing and whistling will warn the

* One of these, kindly presented to me by Senhor Cardozo, is now in the highly
interesting ethnographical collection of Mr. Blackmore, at Salisbury. May many f
follow the example of this Maecenas of Art and Science, who not only collects and
preserves the historic and prehistoric remains at and near Salisbury, but tries to
embrace the whole history of human development !

RI

a



THE WILD INDIAN TRIBES OF THE MADEIRA VALLEY. 169

lingerers at Cerrito that it is time to get ready, if they would catch the
train in Guajara, and by that the steamer at San Antonio, and, by that
again, the Transatlantic Mail at Para!

And then, after the lapse of another age, the Red Man will have gone,
and nothing will be left of his transit but—a few broken pots.



CHAPTER VII.

THE MOJOS INDIANS OF THE FORMER JESUIT MISSIONS IN BOLIVIA.

Foundation of the Missions.
—Life there.—Severe Dis-
cipline—Their actual State.
~—Bloody Episode at Santa
Ana.—Consequences of the
political Storms. — High
Festivals and Processions.
—Visit of the Excellentis-
simo.—The Ohicha.—Vo-
cabulary.— The Missions
on the Paranapanema and
Tibagy.—Final Considera-
tions.

the campos or
prairies of Eastern
Bolivia, between
the Beni, the Ma-
moré, the Itonama, and
the Guaporé, about
30,000 real unmixed
Indians, the Mojos, still
exist in the former
Jesuit Missions,* fifteen
large regularly planned villages. Totally cut off from the outer world
—on one side by the ice-covered Cordillera de los Andes; and, on
the other, by pathless wastes of forest, together with scarcely explored

* Trinidad was founded in 1687 San José was founded in 1691
San Ignacio ¥ 1689 San Borja a 1693
San Javier f. 1690 Exaltacion Rs 1704

In the church of the latter Mission may still be seen a small crucifix, with a tiny



eects

THE MOJOS INDIANS. 171

rivers full of rapids and cataracts—and deprived, moreover, of their
leaders and teachers, they live in a state of disheartening depression
and bondage little removed from absolute slavery.

When their ancestors first lent a willing ear to the sweet words
of the wary priests, and, finding themselves settled in places little
suited to their former modes of life, gradually gave up all their old
customs, they bent before a far superior mental power, which soon
discovered the patriarchal severity of sway to be the form of govern-
ment best suited as well to the selfish purposes of the rulers as to
the childish intellect of the Indians.

If they felt their subjection, and if their proud chiefs had to bow
before the Fathers, they were recompensed by the protection extended
to them by the latter; which, especially during the slave-robbing
expeditions of the Paulistas, was of great service to them. The
ruinous feuds between the different tribes ceased; and materially they
were better off than before in many respects, the planting of maize and
mandioca on a larger scale, and the breeding of the smaller domestic
animals, ensuring a more regular and equal course’ of life than that
supplied by hunting and fishing.

The early stages of the work of civilisation must have been attended
with great difficulties; and it is much to be regretted, in the interest
of both history and psychology, that the scanty reports we have on
them are too partial to be implicitly relied upon, coming as they do
from the Jesuits themselves, and from their adversaries, who triumphed
after the suppression of the Order. Our chief authority, out of the
ranks of the latter, is Don Feliz de Azéra, a Spanish astronomer and
surveyor; who, towards the end of the last and in the beginning of
the present century, visited these countries, and communicated with
several of the Indians, who well remembered the government of the
Fathers and their expulsion in 1767.

particle of the Holy Cross carefully secured within a crystal case, with the following
words referring to the foundation engraved on a silver plate at its base :—

“S. Lignum Crucis, del que se adora en el Colegio de 8. Pablo de Lima, le dié
el Padre Provincial, Antonio Vasquez, al Padre Juan del Campo, quien como Rector de
S. Pablo lo dio 4 otro Padre grave y este al P. N. de O., que con bene placito de los
Superiores lo applicé a la Reduccion de los Mojos de la Exaltacion de la Cruz que
funda el Padre Ant. Garriga anno 1704.”

The nine other Missions, Loreto, 8. Pedro, 8. Ramon, 8. Maria Magdalena, N. 8.
de la Concepcion, N. 8. del Carmen, S. Joaquim, 8. Ana, and Reyes, were likewise
founded in the beginning of the eighteenth century. aa



THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

He even goes so far as to deprive the Jesuits of all credit for the
foundation of the Missions; which, as he labours to prove, had their
origin in the so-called Encommiendas, plantations of Indian slaves
established by private persons, civil and military officers of high rank,
under the protection of the Government; and whose success and con-
tinuance were rendered possible only by the dread felt by the still
independent tribes of the terrible razzias of the Paulistas. But Azara
is too prejudiced altogether. Surely the eruel treatment of the En-
commiendas cannot be taken as having added to the prosperity of the
Missions, institutions founded by the same hated white race; and the
fear of the invasions of the Paulistas could not have been very great
with the Chiquitos, and the Mojos for instance, living in the far West
(the present Bolivia), though elsewhere it might have counted for
something.*

The seeret of the complete success of the Jesuits doubtless lay in the
strict organization and discipline of the Order, the zeal and unselfishness
of its members, the tact with which they treated the Indians; and in
the docile temper and quiet humility which down to the present day
characterize the tribes they chiefly experimented on, the Guaranis and
the Mojos. Some attempts at reducing to submission other tribes, like
the warlike Coroados between the Parand and upper U: ruguay, were
quite unsuccessful; and in one case ended with the death of the daring
missionary.

According to the notes of Azara, and of the Jesuits Dobrizhoffer and
Charlevoix, the way in which these Missions (or Reducciones, as they
were then called) were administered was as follows. On each of them
were two priests; one apparently to attend exclusively to spiritual affairs,
but in reality directing the whole concern, and the other to look after
worldly matters, the administration in all its details. All the Missions
within a certain district were under the superintendence of a superior,
who resided at one of the principal ones—for the Paraguay Missions, it
was Candelaria ; for those of the Beni, 8. Pedro—and formed the medium
of communication between those outposts and the General of the Order in
Europe.

The preliminary measures for the foundation of a new Mission are
thus described by Azara. First of all, some Indians belonging to an

* Once only, in 1691, the Paulistas came as far as Chiquitos ; but they were driven
back, and have ever since left the Missions there in peace.



THE MOJOS INDIANS. 173

established Reduccion were sent with presents to the tribe to be
“reduced,” and the decoy birds were instructed to tell their wild
brothers that a noble white man in the neighbourhood, who loved them
dearly, greatly desired to come and live with them; that he would bring
them gifts even more valuable than those presented; that they then
would always have plenty of cattle, iron utensils, and wearing apparel ;
and that he would build houses for them, cure their sick, and altogether
be of the greatest service to the whole tribe. The messengers, of course,
were chosen from the best-looking and most intelligent of the Indians of
the nearest Mission; their contentedness was in itself a strong induce-
ment; and the promises of the white man usually sounded so prettily in
the ears of the hearers, that they willingly consented to the visit of the
Great Unknown who, naturally losing no time, made his triumphal entry
in the malocca, accompanied by a considerable number of his former
pupils, carrying presents, and driving a small herd of cattle before them.

In a highly elevated state of mind, generated amid festive dances
and revels, the materials for which the Padre supplied with unsparing
hand, the new village is planned, streets are measured out, a chapel
and solid houses of pisé are built (of course, by the Indians of
the older Mission, whom I can fancy laughing quietly in their
sleeves), in place of the light open sheds; and, above everything, the
surrounding country is planted with mandioca, corn, and cotton. The
magnificent climate ripens the crops; new herds are brought over from
the old Mission ; and, when the season of harvest arrives, the delighted
savage finds himself in the possession of an unwonted abundance, and
in a short time gets so used to the new order of things that he does
not think of returning to his old habits. Without much trouble, he
now has plenty of everything; whereas formerly, especially in the rainy
season, when the swollen rivers spread their thick floods far and wide
over the plains, and the fishes, finding worms and insects to their heart’s
content, despised his baits—more than once hunger had stared him in
the face, in spite of his exertions. The ague, which long had tormented
him, has vanished before the powerful bitter medicine of the white man ;
the ugly wound, which had defied even the conjuring of his mighty Pajé,
has closed with the balm supplied by the holy man. In short, the son
of the forest has never before felt so rich and so happy.*

M3 Referring to the hearty appetite of the Indians and the course pursued by the



ee

TTT

174 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

Then there is another element not to be overlooked. The female sex
could not but profit by the diffusion of gentler customs, just as in
the time of our own heathen forefathers, when St. Boniface and other
pious sons of Erin’s green isle first preached the Gospel on the Rhine
and Fulda; and the squaws, having the satisfaction of learning from the
Indians of the Missions that there the lords of the creation had to be
content with one wife only, and moreover that, like themselves, they had
to work in the fields, doubtless were the first to be won over to the
new doctrine; and there, as in our own country, and then, as in our own
time, became the most powerful auxiliaries of the white men in black
gowns. Anyhow, we get nearer to the arrival of the period of decision,
which will show us whether the love of freedom or the honeyed words
of the Father will prevail; and some fine morning he calls together
all his children, and, in well-known accents,* delivers the following
speech, or one conducting to the same conclusion :—“ Beloved ones, you
see that it is quite a comfortable life you lead under my fatherly
guidance. I hope you will now altogether give up your old life in the
woods; only, as it is quite impossible, you know, that your brethren
should go on working for you as they have hitherto done, you must
yourselves lend a helping hand in the fields and with the herds; and, in
short, you must do all I tell you.”

liven if some of the elder Indians sulkily took up their bows, and
turned their backs on the orator and his nearly complete Mission, the
greater part of the tribe thought of the fleshpots of Egypt, and—
remained.

Then a proud staff of overseers and assistants was named from
among the Indians themselves, very likely, at first, from those of the
Jesuits, Dobrizhoffer says: ‘If, after the saying of St. Paul, faith enters by the ears
with other heathens, it certainly enters by the mouth with the savages of the
Paraguay.”

* Already in the sixteenth century the Jesuits, Joseph de Anchieta and Manoel
da Vega, had written vocabularies of the Tupi language, the Lingoa Geral
Brazilica; and in 1639 followed several Guarani vocabularies by Montoya. They
were intended to help the missionaries in their task, and also to render that com-
paratively rich idiom the general one, a sort of ‘‘lingua franca,” in all South
America. However, the Padres also took the trouble of learning less-spread idioms,
when they thought it necessary for their success. One of our Mojos from Trinidad
had a little book of well-written prayers in his own language, which is quite different
from the Tupi. The original dates from the Jesuits, and the copies taken by the
Indians themselves, as the proprietor proudly assured me, descend from generation to

generation. In the Reducciones on the Beni, the missionaries had to learn, in this way,
no less than seven languages.


een

THE MOJOS INDIANS. 175

next Mission; the Correjidor and the Alealdes carrying silver-headed
sticks as emblems of their exalted rank, and visiting the Director every
day to receive his orders; the Major-domo de Collegio, who, as chief
master of the household, had to look after the provisions of the com-
munity, and to distribute the weekly rations ; then the masters of the
different trades—the Capitano de los Carpinteros, the master of the
carpenters; the Capitano de los Herreros, the master of the smiths; the
Capitano de los Tejederos, the master of the weavers; the Capitano de los
Rosarios (instead of Torneros), the master of the turners, so called because
he had to make the rosaries worn by every one,* and was attached to the
service of the church; the Capitano de la Capella, the Capitano de la
Plata, and the Capitano de la Cera, the masters of the chapel, of the
plate, and of the wax. Besides, there were the Fiscales, to look after
the works in the fields; and the Cruzeros, a sort of sanitary police, recog-
nisable by black crosses on their white camisetas, who had to take care of
the sick, and to register the births and deaths.

The pomp of sacerdotal sway, which to the present day profoundly
impresses the childish mind of all these nations, certainly contributed
greatly to make them forget the loss of that golden liberty which the
next generation never even knew; and the Fathers took special care to
allot to the whole population as large and as active a share in its display
as was possible, be it in the shape of the execution of sacred music or
of processions, or of symbolic dances,

The churches, now half in ruins and bereft of the best part of
their ornaments, in the time of their splendour must have surpassed
everything till then seen in South America, in respect of magnificence
at least, if not in artistic beauty; and as for the processions, Charlevoix
relates wonderful things about them. Especially on Corpus Christi day,
not only was there the display of a profusion of the richest carpets,
banners, and standards, but even the luxuriant tropical vegetation was
brought under contribution for the embellishment of the “Via Trium-
phalis;” and no activity of the teeming fancy of the artist is equal to
utilising all the treasures that offers. JLow poor seems our Northern
vegetation in that respect! Firs and birches are about the only things
we use on such occasions ; whereas with the palms, ferns, orchids, aroideve

* Our paddlers, each of whom had two or three rosaries with them, cut very

pretty beads of the Palo Maria with their long knives, and perforated them with three-
edged needles ; evidently reminiscences of their old industry.



mee << ere ee

AE

ak NN Se ce

- 7 a —=—

a a

176 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

and creepers of those forests, one might decorate doorways “ fit to be the
gates of Paradise.”

Under high arches covered with palm-leaves and magnificent fruits
and flowers, brilliantly coloured parrots and macaws, toucans, snow-white
herons, and demure-looking falcons were chained up. Even the yellow
puma, and the black and the spotted jaguar, were exposed in cages; and
the scaly inhabitants of the neighbouring rivers were to be seen living
in large basins. The procession itself——with its long train of musicians,
and fantastically-clad sword-dancers wearing aureolas of long arara
feathers, and carrying gold-embroidered canopies, banners, silver crosses,
&c., and followed by the whole male population, armed partly with guns
and partly with bows and arrows—must, indeed, have presented an
imposing spectacle, even to minds less impressionable than those of
the Mojos.

Other shows, which gratified their taste for the pomp of solemn
sights, and at the same time served to keep up their required military
exercises, were the sham fights, which were held once a week on the
square before the church and the collegio; and in which the whole
population, capable of bearing arms, had to take part. Horse and foot
then engaged each other under the command of richly accoutred leaders,
the whole being directed by the Correjidor as commander-in-chief ; and
the combatants are said sometimes to have warmed up to such a degree
that it has been judged necessary to separate them by force.

These exercises—continued with even more zeal when the Spanish
Government had, on Montoya’s request after the invasion of the
Paulistas, provided the Indians with fire-arms—enabled the Jesuits not
only to send the latter back with bloody heads, but also frequently to
assist the Spanish Government in the wars after the separation of
Portugal from Spain; when, in Uruguay especially, there were hot
fights about the so-called Colonia. This severity of discipline and of
military regularity did not apply only to their exercises. Their whole
life was punctually regulated in the Reducciones; and to each hour was
allotted its particular function,* which was rigidly maintained. At
dawn of day, a bell called the Indians to prayer; and, after the whole
population had assembled on the large square, the musicians playing the

* Usque co illic omnes res, vel maxime private, ad certam quandam normam ct
constantem directee erant, ut secundum morem in Bolivia traditum conjuges Indiani
media nocte sono tintinnabuli ad exercendum coitum excitarentur.



THE MOJOS INDIANS. 177

while, those destined to field-work betook themselves to the. scenes of
their activity, under the guidance of their overseers, and carrying the
image of a saint with them, while the artisans went to their shops with
their capitanos or masters. To every one was appointed his daily task ;
and, with the perfect drilling and schooling they had undergone, we
cannot suppose that it was often necessary to apply compulsion.

Yet compulsion was applied sometimes; and the whole scheme of
education was so arranged as to emphasize the necessity of submitting
to law, and to chastisement as the atonement inevitably due to the com-
mission of an offence. On this head there still survives a tradition in
the Missions, according to which one of the Padres themselves (pro-
bably one of the younger ones) had to submit to the discipline of a
severe punishment, it may be for some imaginary crime. The course of
reflection designed to be impressed upon the astonished Indians evidently
was this: If this can happen with the green wood—the clever,
reasonable white man, communing directly with the Divinity: how, in
the like case, can the dry wood murmur and rebel—the poor sinful
Indian ?

Dark stories also are afloat of rebellious chieftains imprisoned for
life, who, in their enforced leisure, pondered over their fruitless
endeavours to cross the plans of the Society of Jesus.

And what were these plans ?

Had they really the intention of founding an independent realm of
Guaranis? Was it to be a refuge for them in the event of some storm
sweeping them out of Europe? ‘They have been charged with
designedly excluding the Spanish language from the Missions (which
is the more striking, as with that exception they devoted tolerable
attention to the efficiency of their schooling), with the view of securing
to themselves the monopoly of direction; and by this prudent measure,
indeed, they rendered any instigation of the Indians by their enemies
exceedingly difficult, if not altogether impossible. However, though
they were well able to resist the royal decree of their expulsion, and to
detach themselves and their domains from a State incapable of opposing
them energetically (as did their mental cousin, the memorable Francia,
in Paraguay), they delivered up their Reducciones (which in Rio Grande
do Sul, Corrientes, and Paraguay alone, are said to have numbered
100,000 souls) to the Commissary, who was attended only by a few
horsemen and a couple of Franciscan monks, with a calmness and

"



178 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

philosophy the grandeur of which we might admire, but for the sus-
picion which intrudes itself that the Fathers regarded the whole as
only a passing storm, and were unwilling to incur the odium of rebels
for nothing.

Or did they look upon their South American Missions as a milch-
cow, which would give them the means of carrying out their ambitious
plans in Europe?

At any rate, the speculation in the immense natural treasures of
these countries was not a bad one. If, even at that early period of
development, the opening trade in hides, cotton, Paraguay tea in the
South, and cacdo in the North, proved to be the source of so much
wealth that the churches of the Missions abounded in plate, richly-
ornamented sacred vessels, and chasubles, the remains of which are
still treasured up and jealously guarded by the Mojos on the Beni as
heritages of the good old times, what might not have been the con-
dition of these unparalleled colonies, after the lapse of half a century ?

The trade in Paraguay tea, which is so indispensable to high and
low on the River Plate, would alone have yielded an immense revenue,
as it nowhere thrives so well as it does there, not to speak of the
cattle and, in the Northern provinces, the sugar-cane, coffee, cacao, &c.

The Missions would have become the grandest and the best-
administered agricultural institutions the world had ever seen, for there
can be no doubt that the Jesuits would have succeeded in bringing
them down to our own time in almost unchanged condition; only ¢
ceaseless stream of immigrants, a far-extending net of roads and rail-
ways, and a general activity of trade (such as has been observed to
spring up within the last ten years), might have interfered with the
continuance of the patriarchal system: but, in any case, it would have
taken some time to abolish it entirely.

After all we have seen, the condition of the Indians during the
prosperity of the Missions differed from real slavery only in the
particular that they were not exposed for sale; and it almost sounds
ridiculous when Jesuit authors like Charlevoix’ speak of Christian
republics, in allusion to the institutions of early Christianity. The
Indians certainly were held on about the same low level as slaves.
There was no private property in the community, save their trifling
household goods; the soil was cultivated joimtly; and they were
strictly prohibited from selling to strangers the produce of their



THE MOJOS INDIANS. 179

industry during their hours of leisure. The community of goods,
therefore, existed only in favour of their masters; into whose pockets
all the profits of the common work went, and who gave to their
subordinates only such share as they pleased or thought absolutely
necessary.

Whether such treatment was at all Christianlike, or not, the famous
disciples of Loyola must have been the best judges themselves: but
Republican it surely was not; and our Socialist theorists, not to speak
of the firebrand-wielding disciples of the same school, will hardly
assent to this interpretation of their principles. On a review of all
the circumstances, we cannot look upon the Missions in the same rosy,
ideal light as Jesuit authors did; yet, when we observe the state of
degeneracy and misery in which the descendants of those Indians (who
in the narrowness of their views certainly felt themselves happy) exist,
within a century of the great change in their affairs, it strikes us that
the seeming advantage of the greater liberty they now enjoy has
been too dearly purchased. If the Jesuits did take advantage of them,
it was after a cleverly-conceived system, calculated to bear fruit for a
long season. Their existence, at least, was ensured to them; whereas
now they are cleaned out, ruined physically and morally, after no system
at all, by hundreds of pitiless adventurers, who have no concern
whatever for their future welfare.

While under the rule of the Fathers, they were, it must be owned,
in a condition of tutelage not exactly favourable to their future
development; but the time of emancipation would have arrived to
them also, perhaps under better auspices than the present; for let us
hope that the sun of real civilisation will some day shine upon
unfortunate Bolivia, continually disturbed with internal storms, and that
her latent treasures will yet emerge to the light.

In the present state of things, the Indians are entirely in the
hands of a horde of lawless adventurers, intent upon their own gains ;
from the vain but crafty Bolivian, and the fugitive defaulter from Rio
de Janeiro, to the ignorant Polish pedlar, and the dirty Neapolitan
tinker. Under pretext of trading, these cheat and defraud the artless
red-skins in the most shameful way. And withal it seems as if these
people had all sworn to do as much injury as they could to the morals
of these children of Nature. The vigarios (the priests of the Pueblos)
especially do their utmost to undo the work of their predecessors. To

N 2



180 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

them neither the silver vessels,* nor the wives nor the daughters of their
parishioners are sacred ;+ and, with the innate frivolity and sensuality
of the natives, such examples of depravity must exercise the saddest
influence on their habits.

These introductory remarks will serve to continue my reference in
Chapter IT. to the present state of the late Missions, now called
Pueblos, that is, villages. They are under the superintendence of
Correjidors, officials appointed by the Government and sent over from
La Paz, Cochabamba, or Santa Cruz. But, as the Departamento del
Beni, in which these Pueblos are, is regarded as a sort of exile, and
as there usually are few aspirants to the office, the Government, having
small choice, frequently entrusts the post to totally unfit hands.

As in most of the South American republics, the endless political
disorders, which are caused by personal interests, and not by the conflict
of political feeling, must also have contributed to make the remote
Departamento a sort of forlorn outpost, undeserving of any, even the
least, sacrifice. Had even competent Government officials taken greater
interest in it, and been inspired with the desire to do something towards
its progress, the short interval between the pulling down of one
President and the fall of his successor, the excitement produced by
these always more or less bloody dramas, and the “subsequent changes
in the offices, have not admitted of the execution of any wide improve-
ments. If, for example, the importance of a regular line of com-
munication between the Mamoré and the Amazon had not been
impressed from without, Bolivia never would have done anything for
it; and for ages to come the few imported European goods would

* In a conversation I had at Trinidad with the Superintendent of Police, respect-
ing the treasures still existing in the Pueblos, he dwelt upon the enormity of the
vigarios, over whom he had no authority whatever, who secreted one after another of
the vessels, had them melted down, and then sold the silver. Besides, added he,
with a characteristic movement of the hand, as though he were crushing some basin,
they sometimes so disfigure the delicately-ornamented and carved vessels that they
impudently use them at their own tables.

} Sexuum inter se consuetudo cum apud nullam Indianorum gentium Austro-
Americanarum magna cum severitate exerceatur, tum apud Mojos Bolivis verecundia
imprimis laxata est. Maritus si post sex vel octo mensium absentiam domum rediit,
dummodo ei uxor novam “Camisetam” novumque lectum suspensum texuerit, miti
animo audit mulierem cum hoc vel illo rem habuisse se narrantem, ac tum demum
indignabitur, si forte corpus miscuerit cum aliquo ex Albis.

Que cum ita sint, syphiliticos morbos atrocem in modum ingravescere, facile
intelligitur; atque ii vel preecipue in causa sunt intermorientium paulatim aut
mnarcescentium eorum, qui Alborum consuetudine utuntur, Indianorum.


THE MOJOS INDIANS. 181

have continued to be carried over the desolate paths of the Cordillera,
while the rich products of the country would have been left to decay
and ruin, like its poor brown population,

Only twice, in a space of more than forty years, did the Govern-
ment at La Paz deign to remember its subjects on the Mamoré; and
on both occasions they designed only the robbery of the Missions. In
1830, or thereabouts, the Indians of the Pueblo de Santa Ana rebelled
against their Correjidor, whose brawling son had killed their chieftain
in a scuffle. The criminal escaped, and in his place the incensed Mojos
murdered the father, whose house they burned down at the same
time: but their vengeance soon cooled; they quietly laid down bows
and arrows, and returned to their wonted occupations.

Nothing could have been easier than to find out the ringleaders,
to bring them to trial, and to have them severely punished. The
Government of the Republic, however, had other intentions than to
make an example of them. They had long waited at La Paz for an
opportunity of getting hold of the silver treasure of the Pueblos; and
now it had come at last. Some hundreds of soldiers were despatched
to the Departamento, charged to seize half of the plate of all the fifteen
Pueblos, the remotest of which, perhaps, had not even heard of the
committed crime, and to bring it as satisfaction to La Paz. As the
want of sympathy between the seven different tribes of the Missions,
which might have been insidiously encouraged by the Jesuits, put the
idea of an organized resistance out of the question, the pilfering
soldiery went from Pueblo to Pueblo, and had but to pack up the
sacred vessels and to load their beasts of burden with them. How
much was carried off in this way cannot now be exactly ascertained ;
but it may be presumed that it was not less than the prescribed half;
and at the present day there are, in the fifteen Missions together,
nearly 100 arrobas, that is 3,000 pounds, of silver.*

But when President Melgarejot—a brutal man, a murderer, and a

* The church in the Mission of 8. Pedyo alone had 2,000 Ib. of silver in the time of
the Jesuits.

+ Nothing bears witness more strikingly to the sad political condition of the country
than the number of its Presidents since the Declaration of Independence, or, perhaps,
the way in which most of them retired from the scene of politics and—life. They
were:

1. The Libertador, Simon Bolivar, born in Carécas 1784, died 1830.
2. Marshal José Ant. de Sucre, born at Cumané 1793, murdered 1830.



182 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

drunkard, who by pitiless oppression of the financially ruimed country
secured the means for his life guards—also conceived the idea of
robbing the churches in the Pueblos on the Mamoré and the Itonama
for a second time, and of making clean work of it once for all, the Indians
of Trinidad rose as one man, and obliged the lieutenant and his little
troop, who had been sent thither for a start under an_ evidently
erroneous conception of things, to beat a hasty retreat without fulfilling
their mission. .

Save these sporadic and, as will be allowed, not very profitable
interventions on the part of the Supreme Government, the Indians, who
do not meddle with the regularly recurring political revolutions, are com-
pletely abandoned to their own indolence and to the mercy of the
traders I have already named, upon payment of the annual tax of
4 pesos, about 20 franes, per head.

In illustration of the reckless indifference with which the amplest
sources of wealth, that might powerfully contribute to the country’s
future prosperity, are left to ruin, let me give the following narrative :
On the campos near the Missions there were innumerable herds of
half-wild cattle, the descendants of those bred in the time of the Jesuits,
and under their iron government so jealously guarded that the Indians
never dared take more of them than the Padres graciously permitted. *
It was a stock which, though sprung from small beginnings, had in the
course of two hundred years increased to an immense total ; judicious

8. General D. Pedro Blanco, murdered 1838.
4. General D. Andres Santa Cruz.
5. General D. José Miguel de Velasco, died 1860.
6. General José Ballivian, poisoned at Rio de Janciro 1851.
7. General Manoel Isidoro Belzu.
8. General George Cordova, murdered 1861.
9. Dr. D. José Maria Linares, died at Valparaiso 1861.
10. General José Maria Aché4.
11. General Mariano Melgarejo, murdered 1872.
12. Dr. A. Morales, assassinated 1873.
18. Lieutenant-Colonel Adolfo Ballivian, elected 15th May, 1873.

Only two of these formally surrendered their supreme office to their successors.
Some were murdered immediately after their fall; others on their flight, after it; some
of them even on neutral territory.

* According to a tradition still current in the Pueblos, the Jesuits, in order to
utterly spoil the Indians’ appetite for beef, and to give their newly-imported herds time
to increase, tried to make them believe that the meat of the horned monsters which had
come from such a distance was injurious to the red man; and it is added that, by
way of emphasising the statement, they were careful to let them have some poisoned
pieces. Who is not reminded by this of the well-known Jesuitical principle ?


THE MOJOS INDIANS. 183

management of which would have continued to yield increased results.
But “el Supremo Gobierno” at:La Paz—adopting Apres nous le
déluge for its motto—apparently prefers immediate profit to all the
bright visions of the future, and has for twenty-five years past allowed a
set of adventurers, coming mostly from Santa Cruz de Ja Sierra, to carry.
on a war of destruction against these cattle. The payment of a tax of
one peso per head purchased the right of any one to kill as many as he
liked or could catch ; and, if he understood his business, and hit on the
right way of addressing the controlling Correjidor, he paid, let us say,
300 dollars for 3,000 head of cattle.

But as this mode of destruction was perhaps found to be rather a
slow one, twelve years ago a well-organized company purchased, for the
round sum of 5,000 dollars, the monopoly of slaughter on a large scale,
for a period of ten years, on the campos of the Beni and the Mamoré;
and it must be confessed that the utmost was then done, even for
South America, in the way of beastly brutality and thoughtless waste.

In these cases, generally, only the hides and tallow were made use
of, the meat being left as worthless to the vultures. To be sure, neither
the hands nor the appliances for cutting, salting, -and drying—such as
may be found in the great saladeiros of the Argentine Republic,
Uruguay and Rio Grande do Sul*—could be easily found in Bolivia,
and the preparation of Liebig’s extract of meat, in the absence of
machinery, has been, of course, quite out of the question.

This summary mode of doing business, though it may be sometimes
justifiable, will always be opposed to European sentiment, especially
when disclosure is made of the disgusting particulars. The above-
mentioned company, for instance, caused to be erected + strong fences,
extending widely over the campos, and narrowing gradually towards
the end. Into this waterless “corral” the flying herds were driven by
mounted Indians, and the poor animals, distressed with fear and thirst,
died in such numbers that, under the glowing tropical sun, the greater
portion of the hides and fat was spoilt long before the hides could be

* In some saladeiros, or charqueadas (that is, factories of charque, or carne secca,
dried meat), from 800 to 1,000 oxen are slaughtered daily, and their meat cut with a
dexterity that surpasses belief. : aoe

+ The palings of these fences are bound with strips of untanned hide, which is
used in these countries for the most different purposes. Lagos (slings) are made of it;
beds and chairs are covered with it; and the cat-o’-nine-tails (the guasca) is a bundle
of slightly-twisted strips of it.



184 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

taken off. But, where one of these abominable chases proved ruinous
rather than profitable, others, effected with more cireumspection, proved
successful ; and many thousands of the valuable and easily-transported
hides, when sold, brought such a plenty to the country, that a perfect
Fools’ Paradise ensued.

The caballero, who galloped proudly along in his red-striped poncho,
with the large sombrero on his black hair, and silver spurs to his tall deer-
skin boots, but showing none of the gvand qualities of his Spanish
ancestry save unbounded vanity and dandyism, then lost and won immense
sums, and hundreds of hides, at dice. These he always carried with him
on his rides over the campos ; and, at a moment’s notice, the saddle-cloth
was spread on the ground, and the blind goddess was tempted. In the
Pueblos the lazy Indians burnt tallow instead of fuel, and yet there
remained such vast herds of cattle that a fat cow did not cost above two
dollars. So the Government, always embarrassed for money, and thinking
this source of wealth to be inexhaustible, had the effrontery to pay their
officials in the Pueblos on the Mamoré (the correjidores, vigarios, and
schoolmasters) with bonds for so many head of wild cattle, leaving it to
their own judgment whether they caught them themselves, or sold their
bonds at a considerable abatement to the professional slaughterers.

Hundreds and hundreds of fat, easily-domesticated animals could be
had in this way for little more than the trouble of capturing them; but un-
fortunately the example of our old friend, Antonio Cardozo, who acquired
such herds and made them the stock of an estancia near Exaltacion, has not
as yet found many followers among the Bolivians; and this is the more
to be regretted as the consequences of such an inconsiderate policy soon
began to show themselves. The herds were gradually reduced until their

8 cS ve
last remains have retired, under the guidance of proud bulls,* to remote
corners of the campos, where, by reason of the wild Indians, they will be

* The Bolivians say that the strongest of the young bulls, after bloody fights with
his competitors, forms a new herd, at the head of two or three dozens of cows, while
the weaker bulls also unite in troops of some dozens. It is a strange fact that the hide
of these wild bulls is far superior to that of the tame, in respect of toughness and
durability, and therefore is always much valued, especially for the lasso-making.
Every year a great number of Gauchos come over from the Argentine Republic, from
Salta and Tucuman, to buy these hides for making the indestructible nooses so indis-
pensable to them for the seizure of the half-wild horses, mules, &c., on their pampas.
As the so-called tame cattle of Bolivia, as well as of the Argentine Republic, are as
little stabled as the wild bulls on the Mamoré and the Beni, the difference in the

toughness of the hides can arise only from the tame bulls being coupled with a far
greater number of cows than the wild ones.


THE MOJOS INDIANS. 185

left m peace for some time to come ; and thus has a country, particularly
adapted for cattle breeding by its immense natural prairies, excellent
climate and sparse population, been most brutally deprived of one source
of future national wealth and prosperity.

With the wild cattle have also vanished the stags, the deer, and the
troops of long-necked emus,* which once lived on the campos in the
immediate vicinity of the Pueblos. All have been sacrificed to the wild
greed of the white man, and the thoughtlessness of the Indians; durable
profit being postponed to the advantage of the moment. One thing
only, strange to say, survives amid all these sad changes—the practice
of the Government in Sucre and La Paz of paying the officials in the
Pueblos by bonds on wild cows; these gentlemen evidently shutting
their eyes resolutely to the reductions they have already effected ; and I
should not at all wonder if, on occasion of some future loan, European
capitalists were offered the wild herds on the campos as supplementary
securities to the treasures to be dug out of the silver and copper mines
in the mountains, and to the taxes and tolls to be levied on roads and
railroads yet to be built.

At present it is impossible even to calculate the extent of the damage
that has been done; but it is quite certain that the Indians of the
Missions, who till now were well fed, are already so far degraded as to
seck greedily for earth-worms, which they dry on cords before their
cottages for their own consumption, and that they have begun to decrease
in an accelerated ratio; which is surely effected, among other causes,
by physical want.

While, on the one side, the wild cattle are destroyed with a zeal
worthy of a better cause, on the other, no pains whatever are taken
to turn the rich vegetable treasures of the country to account. Not the
least effort is made to extend and improve the culture of the cacao, sugar-

* The American ostrich, Ema or Emi, also called N’handt, by the Mojos Pi-yu
(Rhea Americana), is still frequently found on the remoter campos of the province of
Minas. Its eggs are about two-thirds the size of African ostrich-eggs.

+ Since writing the above, I have seen the Concession of the Bolivian Government,
authorising Colonel G. E. Church to run steamers on all the rivers of the Republic
belonging to the Madeira basin; and, sure enough, in it was an article (No. 3) which
ran as follows:—The Bolivian Government concedes to the Steam Navigation Company
the right of appropriating fuel and timber wherever it is not on private property, and
of taking 8,000 head of cattle from the herds owned by the State in the Departamento
del Beni (sic), on condition, however, that this be done in the way most advantageous
to both the State and the Company.



asian

186 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

cane, tobacco and cotton, or to make use of the magnificent dye-
woods, timbers, and resins wherewith prodigal Nature has so lavishly
endowed it. As little is done for industry, to wit, in the development
of the extraordinary skill exhibited by the Indians in plaitings and
weavings of all kinds, and which, if assisted somewhat by European
culture, would justify the best hopes for the future. On the contrary,
everything is done to dishearten them thoroughly in this respect. They
are required to sell at the lowest prices the varied produce of their
industry ; solid palm-straw hats (the so-called Panama hats), tastefully
ornamented mats made of brilliantly-dyed rushes, and cotton weavings
(macanas), which far excel European goods in quality of texture and
harmony of colour, and which, moreover, are in great demand and fetch
high prices in the towns, Cochabamba, Sucre, and La Paz ;* and again,
they are forced to buy, at six times their fair value, our gaudy cottons,
printed with glaring aniline colours, which the fair sex vastly prefer to
the spotless white, or to the subdued colours of their own manufactures.

No wonder, then, that a kind of lethargy creeps over the Indians,
thus abused, and that with their good humour their skill at the work
also gradually wears away. Indeed, experienced Bolivians have assured
me that, of late, it was easy to observe not only a reduction in the
quantity, but even a deterioration in the quality of their macanas.

The chieftains, of whom there is one in every Pueblo, usually
negotiate in the more important matters; they hire the paddlers for
your voyage to the Amazon, for instance, and are entrusted with the
money paid in advance; but even they, as well as their inferiors, are
exposed to frauds perpetrated by white men; and they have so often
fallen victims to their own credulity that little may now be expected
from their intervention. Only recently two of the richest of them,
the one at Exaltacion, and the good old chieftain of Trinidad, had
been swindled by unscrupulous rascals out of their whole fortune,—
house and home, cattle and plate. The former, who to his misfortune
took to dressing after the European fashion, was persuaded by an

* In the Brazilian province of Minas Geraes similar fabrics are produced by the
wives and daughters, and sometimes the female slaves of the poorer planters, or cattle
breeders. As these were always on a small scale, and therefore in larger demand than
the supply, some merchants of Rio de Janeiro had them imitated in England, and
imported great quantities of cotton stuffs exactly resembling them in colour, but of
very different quality. The consequence was that all these fabrics fell into discredit,
from which the modest Brazilian industry was not exempt.





il nu imee titunnlte it i
mai) lily
A

<n HD



THE MOJOS INDIANS. 187

itinerant Neapolitan jeweller that a man in his position should never
wear less than two gold watches, with heavy chains. The poor fellow;
accordingly, bought two third-rate Geneva watches, and other useless
baubles, at stupendous prices;* and he was thereupon so pestered
and dunned by his creditor that, in despair of otherwise satisfying him,
he sold off his house and his herds, and all he possessed ; and he now
lives, a ruined man, in as poor and wretched a condition as the meanest
in the Pueblo.

Besides the correjidor and the vigario, whose offices are not always
filled, as at Exaltacion while we were there, the Government pays—it
is startling to record the fact—a schoolmaster in every’ Pueblo ; and,
poor as the teaching may be, yet one occasionally finds an Indian
able not only to speak but also to read and write Spanish. Among
our eighty paddlers there were two who could read Portuguese almost
fluently, and who accepted with the greatest pleasure some ‘books for
the young” I had with me. Now, as the whole library at the dis-
posal of the Indians in the Pueblos consists of a few written prayers,
which have descended from father to son, from the time of the Holy
Fathers, we may conclude that, with proper help, they would become
tolerably good scholars.

From the same period date also the scores for the Missas Cantadas,
fine old Sacred Music, and the musical instruments, violins, violoncellos,

* These pedlars, or mascates (a word sprung probably from the intercourse between
Goa, which is still under Portuguese rule, and Southern Arabia), with their worthless
gewgaws, are absolute plagues and nuisances in Brazil. Their peculiar style of doing
business is illustrated by the following authentic narrative of what happened some
years ago in the province of Minas, at a fazenda on the Rio Preto, an affluent of the
Parahybuna. Attended by his servant and his mules, a mascate arrived there one
day, who might have founded his proposed attack on the experience he had acquired
in previous visits. After selling a few trinkets, he remained, as usual, to dine with the
family, to whom he was careful to signify his intention to start on the morrow. In the
course of conversation with the gentleman respecting politics and the price of coffee,
and with the ladies touching the latest Paris fashions, he suddenly stopped short, and
took out his watch, which he kissed respectfully before opening it, and which, having
kissed it again, he returned to his pocket. The Brazilian had noticed the manceuvre
with amazement; but only after some time did he venture to ask about it. ‘The
mascate, who at first feigned some embarrassment and hesitation, finally told him that
this watch, an invaluable family inheritance, and a matchless talisman, contained
alikeness of ‘‘ Nossa Senhora,” which protected the wearer against disease, -poverty,
and misfortune of every kind, and that it had saved him already on a hundred
occasions. Again reverently saluting the precious jewel with his lips, he showed
to the fazendeiro, who had been listening with distended optics, a picture of the Virgin

painted on the inside of the lid (which he gave it-as-his own judgment was probably
executed by no less an artist than St. Luke), then re-kisséed it, and carefully stowed



188 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

flutes, harps, and their remarkable bajénes, a sort of trombones in the
shape of huge Pan’s pipes, made of palm-leaves skilfully pasted together.
All these are preserved in the churches; and the Indians themselves
take special care to keep up their, practice on them, and their familiarity
in reading the notes. A high mass at which I assisted in Trinidad was
executed with a precision and correctness that did not show the least
trace of decline, and reflected credit on the musical capacity of the
red race. Altogether, that Sunday niorning I spent in the old church
of Trinidad is one of the memories I most like to dwell upon of all
the voyage.

At early morn I left the house of my kind host, and walked leisurely
through the lonely streets of the Pueblo to the square in which the
church is situated. The rising sun was gilding the clay walls of the
edifice, which, though devoid of all architectural beauty, yet contrasted
effectively with the low mud-houses in its vicinity; sparkling dew-
drops clothed the grass and flowers; and a refreshing cool wind: swept
in from the campos. Again I contemplated the naively-conceived
frescoes on its front of St. Francisco and of St. Luiz de Gonzaga (albeit
they were not executed by artists great in colours and Imes), and the
masterpiece of the tympanum, the mystic device representing the Holy
Trinity. In a Mission singularly consecrated to this mystery, such an
explanation, if we may be permitted so to call it, was rendered all the

it away. Yielding to the ardent entreaties of the fascinated fool, he consented,
reluctantly, to entrust the watch to his keeping for a few hours; all his anxious pro-
posals to purchase it being repelled with indignant resentment, which only served to
inflame the planter’s eagerness to possess the sacred treasure to such a degree that he
continued to offer higher, and still higher, terms for it. This was exactly what the
rogue wanted. After his repeated protestations that he never could be so degraded
as to part, for dirty money, with his most sacred property, he at length consented to
sell, or rather to exchange (trocar, to exchange, is the respectful Brazilian word for
sale or purchase of sacred objects) his talisman for the trifling sum of £250, vowing
again and again that nothing but the claims of an old friend reconciled him to the
sacrifice, As soon as the bargain was concluded, our mascate, pleading urgent
business, mounted his best horse, and, like a prudent man, took to his heels, followed
by his servant and mules. And well he might hasten away! Hardly had he departed
when there came friends and neighbours of the poor victim of superstition, who soon
opened his eyes to the cheat that had been practised upon him; and their sneers and
laughter roused his fury to such a pitch that, putting himself at the head of his
negroes, he galloped off in pursuit of the impostor; but in vain. He had to do with
an old fox, who did not intend to wait until he felt the point of a long Minas knife
between his ribs. What has become of the effigy of ‘Nossa Senhora,” by the hand
of St. Luke, I cannot tell. At any rate, it was a dear family piece, and may perhaps
avail as a talisman against future follies.


THE MOJOS INDIANS. 189

more necessary by the fact that the red neophytes more than once
perplexed the Fathers with unanswerable questions.

While I stood under the portico of the old building, philosophising
and speculating upon the term of active vitality yet reserved for the
operations of the spirit of the age in which the rude imagery was
executed, by hands that have long rotted away below either the green
grass of the campos or the dark vaults of the church, I was joined by
two Indians, who emerged from one of the straight, long streets. They
were the sextons; and almost im-
mediately the bells of the campanile
summoned the villagers to prayers.
As in Brazil, they are not rung in
our way; but several well-tuned ones
are hammered on at the same time
after a peculiar, usually very quick,
rhythm. It does not sound very
solemn ; but the lively melody of the
peals harmonises well with the blue
sky, the bright sun, and the gaudily
dressed congregation, which goes to
church rather for diversion and for
society than for devotion.

It is far otherwise, however, in the
old Missions on the Mamoré, where
both men and women approached
silently and seriously ; the former,
without exception, clad in the classical
camiseta of home manufacture ; the

THE MYSTERY OF THE TRINITY EXPLAINED
BY A JESUIT ARTIST. latter already luxuriating in chemises

of the gaudy, large- flowered cottons
of Europe, with their long black hair flowing loose over the shoulders,
sometimes down to the knees. Even the children, most of them lovely
little creatures, walked as demurely as their elders, with rosaries in their
chubby brown hands. For this auditory at least, church and divine
service had retained all the glory and holiness wherewith the Jesuits of
old had surrounded them.
From the music-gallery, facing the altar, I could easily watch the
filling of the wide hall below, wrapped at first in a mystic twilight. In



190 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

the first row, close to the choir, squatted the women on mats, after
saying a short prayer on their knees; and behind them were the men.
The few white faces, the secretary of the Prefect and two or three
merchants, were completely lost in the crowd of Indians; and I almost
fancied I was hearing mass in the time of Montoya or of one of his
successors. In this gallery, which showed two small organs in richly-
carved cases with painted panels, presently assembled the musicians,
with their fiddles, harps, and bajénes, under the leadership of the master
of the chapel, a venerable-looking old Indian, with large spectacles
adjusted by a cord, with little round pieces of lead, passing over the
crown of his head; and the singers with a small red flag had taken their
post close to the solid wooden balustrade, to help the choir below in case
of need. The priest now appeared before the altar, and the solemn
tones of a fine old mass swept through the spacious aisle. It was the
festival of some saint; and the altar exhibited its richest silver adorn-
ments, while slender palms, waving their graceful boughs from the pillars
of the aisle and from the music tribune, added the charm of tropical
vegetation to the fairylike picture.

An incident, partly comical and partly pathetic, served to intensify
my elated frame of mind. While I leaned over the balustrade in the
effort to seize as much as possible of the lovely spectacle, an elderly
Indian with a brave little boy had knelt down beside me. The old man
had looked neither to the right nor to the left, and the beads of his
rosary glided swiftly through his fingers; but the child soon began to
feel dull perhaps, and his wandering eye at last caught my watch-chain
with the locket attached to it; yet he did not presume to extend his
hand for it: but his smiling face and brightened eyes, when I took it .
off and gave it into his hand, clearly evidenced the delight he felt. The
old man as yet had only looked askance over his rosary at our doings ;
but when, on my opening the medallion, he saw a picture in it, which
possibly he took for that of some saint, he whispered a few hurried
words in the ear of the little fellow, who, seizing the locket with both
his tiny hands, carried it devoutly to his lips.

Quieter and more decorous behaviour than that of these Indians one
could not witness. Here were visible none of those impropricties familiar
in Brazil, where the free-and-easy ladies beckon to their negro boys to
fetch them glasses of water during mass. As silently as they had come
they-returned to their cottages after the ceremony. Such indeed was





| i Ay iif |
if i Mi We

i i

hi \
i

MOJOS INDIAN, FROM THE ANCIENT MISSION OF TRINIDAD,

DANCING BEFORE THE ALTAR ON A HOLY DAY,



THE MOJOS INDIANS. 191,

the stillness that I should have taken the village to be deserted during
the rest of the day, but for some groups of children out at play.

Gorgeous festivals:and processions were counted, as I have already
explained, among the principal factors of a successful catechese; and at
the present day, not only in Bolivia but all over South America, they are:
the shows which electrify the whole population.

In the North of Europe at least, one cannot easily form an adequate
notion of the strange mixture of bigotry, childish delight im shows,
and inclination to debauchery, which impels both high and low to
take part in them.*

In the Pueblos, however, these spectacles derive a distinctive cha-
racter from the prevailing Indian element, which.:strongly ‘contrasts,
in solemn dignity and a certain savageness, with the more ‘childish,
monkey-like conception of the negro-mulatto and mestizo population:
of the cities. ay

In the Pueblo of Exaltacion de la Santa Cruz, where several high
wooden crosses are erected in different places, probably in honour of
its name, a dozen of the sword-dancers (macheteiros), on the day of
the consecration of a church, went singing and dancing and brandishing
their broad knives and wooden swords, from cross to cross, headed by
their chieftain, who carried a heavy silver cross, and followed by
the whole tribe. They wore dazzling white camisetas, rattling stag’s
elaws on their knuckles, and a fanciful head-gear composed of the
long tail-feathers of the araras and of yellow and red toucan’s breasts.

At every cross, and before the altars of the church, they performed

* In some towns in the interior of Brazil, in addition to the scapegraces dressed
as Turks, hangmen and Roman soldiers, an actress takes the part of Mary Magdalene
in the Good Friday procession. Kneeling on a sort of richly-ornamented pedestal
(called andor), carried by six men, with dishevelled hair and inflamed eyes, she fills the
air with her lamentations and screams. The public, among whom unrepenting Mag-
dalenes usually are very numerous, are seized with holy horror; even tears have been
seen to flow here and there ; but, on the whole, it is a wretched exhibition, which gives
rise to scandals of every kind. At Barbacena, a little town in Minas Geraes that enjoys
the worst of reputations as to the morals of its inhabitants, such of the women,
both married and unmarried, as have to reproach themselves for any offence, on a
certain day walk to a chapel boasting a particularly merciful image. of the Virgin;
bare down. to their girdles, with hair loose, and carrying heavy stones on- their heads.
Even persons of the highest rank are obliged to comply with local habits in these
matters ; and at Rio, on Corpus-Christi day, the Emperor Dom Pedro II., bareheaded
for two hours, accompanies the procession, which is preceded by St. George, a hideous
doll of life-size, tied on a horse,—much to the disgust of his sons-in-law, who also
have to submit to the torture, if they happen to be there at the time.



192 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

a sort of allegorical: dance, with a great show of brandishing their
inoffensive weapons, which they at last, breathless and perspiring, laid
down, together with their savage diadems, at the foot of the crucifix ;
the whole evidently representing the submission of the Indians and
their conversion to Christianity.

Old Bolivians have told me that these dances used to be executed
by dozens of macheteiros, and that they would probably have ceased
altogether if the chieftains did not exert the full weight of their
authority in behalf of keeping them up, even forcing the young men,
in case of need, to take part in them.

Self-inflicted tortures are occasionally witnessed in these processions,
under the stimulus of religious fanaticism, apt to remind one of the
great car of Juggernaut. It may be an Indian who, tied by his
outstretched arms and by one leg to a heavy wooden cross, accompanies
the cortége for hours in a painful crawl; or it may be devotees (women
among them) who drag themselves along on their bare knees, until,
fainting and bleeding, they sink down before the altar.

These festivals regularly end in sharp drinking bouts, in which they
contrive to consume a very large quantity of cachaca (brandy), or of
their national beverage, chicha; of which I shall treat below.

Among the chief “profane” occasions for shows and mirth-making
are the rare visits of the Prefect of the Departamento, who resides
at Trinidad, when he passes through the Pueblos on one of his circuits.
Though it be no proud, richly-carved and gilt Venetian barge that
carries him down the Mamoré, but quite an ordinary boat with palm-
leaf awning, which at most boasts the green-yellow-red flag of the
Republic, yet the grace and dignity with which the Excellentissimo
accepts the homage of the crowd waiting for him in the “port”
certainly recall the proudest days of the noble city on the Lagoons.

A volley of musketry is fired, and the high dignitary is solemnly
conducted to the Pueblo, with a concert contributed by the fiddles,
the pipes, and the inevitable bajénes, which on these occasions are
supported by boys walking before the musicians, like the trombones
of antiquity. Headed by their chief, the whole Indian population
passes under the windows of Sua Excellencia, after which a solemn
service is held; but the setting of the sun is awaited impatiently all
the day. Then begin the entertainments, which reach their climax
in a bull-fight of the most cruel kind, and terminate with the night.

Ba ae a a ae

|


oe

THE MOJOS INDIANS. 193

On the Plaza before the loggia of the former Jesuits’ College,
where the Prefect and the officials have taken their seats, an arena
has been formed within a circle of stout palisades. At a given
signal, a wild bull, captured on the campos for the occasion, is
brought im, and the ring is carefully closed on all sides. The animal,
at last disengaged of the several lacos by which it was originally
restrained, suspiciously looks around fora way out ;—in vain! Nothing
meets his view but endless palisades and the towering heads of a
bloodthirsty crowd, intent, from his Excellency down to the lowest

. MOJOS INDIAN OF TRINIDAD.

Indian, upon thoroughly enjoying the death-throes of the king of
the prairies, and prepared to answer his loud roar with a stupendous
shout of triumph, to which the swell of music shall be com-
municated by the violins and bajénes. Then chicha and brandy
are liberally handed round in calabashes; and, after the worthy
representative of the Supreme Goyernment has thrown a few handfuls
of copper coins among the excited crowd, the frenzy may be said
to have reached the pitch required for opening the real business of
the evening. Several athletic Indians, half mad with vanity and drink,

19)



194 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

vault with cat-like agility over the high palings; and with their long,
pointed knives beset the poor animal upon all sides, which, infuriated
by endless devices, ploughs up the soil with its horns. With lowered
head it boldly charges the first adversary; whereupon another sallies
forth from behind, who with a sharp cut of his knife opens a
gaping wound on its back; and, as the bull, bellowing with pain,
turns round upon him, the first assailant, amid the yells of the crowd,
the applause of the Excellentissimo and of the attendant respectability,
and the triumphant music, which now strikes in, literally cuts off a

piece of fiesh from his back.

MARIANO, MOJOS OF TRINIDAD.

Thus proceeds the brutal sport, which is sometimes fraught with
the gravest risks to the fighters: but no casualty suffices to disturb the
general hilarity for one moment. Should any of them be impaled on
the horns, or tossed into the air, or crushed against the palings till
their ribs are broken, they are dragged out, and their places are
taken by fresh gladiators, bolder and more savage than the first
set. Yes, even women, with flashing eyes and flushed cheeks, like
frantic Menads, leap into the gory ring, to cut off their slices
from the carcase of the rapidly-expiring beast; which, when the



THE MOJOS INDIANS. 195

final stroke is delivered that severs the sinews of the hind legs,
sinks groaning and bellowing to the ground, where it rather resembles
a bleeding mass of quivering flesh than the proud animal that had,
an hour before, impatiently and defiantly stamped the sand.

Hereupon arise yells of triumph and brilliant flourishes on the
bajénes. His Excellency expresses his warmest thanks for the elevating
spectacle, and retires to his apartments; and the drunken Indians discuss
their heroic deeds beside the fires, drinking chicha and devouring the
meat of their tortured victim.

As night advances, the gentry assemble in the spacious rooms of
the old collegio for a festive dance, though the rough floors, which
are divided into regular compartments by rows of bones, are far from
inviting, the Holy Fathers who had them laid down probably not having
designed them for any such use.

A few musicians, seated in hammocks in one corner, relieve the
monotony of their recitative—which is partly an amatory effusion and
partly an improvisation suitable to the occasion—by thrumming on
jingling guitars; and the caballeros and senhoritas pair off, either
for the national fandango, or, as in these times of universal copying
and aping is more likely, for the quadrille. A quadrille at the old
Mission of the Beni! And the grocer, or the artist in waistcoats and
great-coats who but yesterday mended our old poncho, in his shirt-
sleeves, the v7s-d-vis of his Excellency, with his little, gaudily-dressed,
black-eyed senhora! And yet, why not? We must never forget that
in South America the colour of the skin, all toleration notwithstand-
ing, determines the social position, and that every white man, or
whoever can pass himself off for such, with the assurance of the
proudest Castilian, thinks himself to be of as good blood as the King
himself.*

* This must happen in all countries where the Caucasian race mingles with the
others, and the difference of race in such cases weighs heavier than all other con-
siderations. TI have known dark Brazilians in the highest positions at Rio de J aneiro,
who would cheerfully have given half their fortunes and their influence for the white
skins of the Portuguese water-carriers, who panted up the staircases of their palaces
with their heavy loads to carn a few pence. Besides, there is no hereditary nobility
in Brazil, whose Constitution is modelled after that of the United States; and personal
nobility can only be bestowed by the Emperor, or bought ; about £200 for a baronet’s
title, £600 for that of an earl’s, and so on. Sharp tongues persist in affirming, that
26 years ago, when that clever philanthropist, José Clemente Pereira, the noble founder
of the Lunatic Asylum at Rio de J aneiro, saw his work in danger of suspension from

o 2

4



,
¥

ee

196 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

The refreshments handed round, chicha and cachaca toddy are so
freely partaken of on all sides that most of the company will long
for a good ride on the morrow over the fresh dewy campos; s0,
wishing them all a Joas noites, we passed under the gloomy wooden
eolonnade which supports the verandah of the collegio, whence we
got a view of the old church looming in the faint starlight, and
sought repose in our own hammocks.

Except making a few feeble attempts at settling the ceascless
differences between the Correjidor and the chieftain of the Pueblo,
and addressing emphatic injunctions to the former as to minding the
yearly poll-tax of the Indians, aud as to providing against their escape
to Brazilian territory, I do not think the Excellentissimo Senhor
Prefecto del Departamento had much business to transact with his
subordinates on the following day; and we may well suffer him to
continue in peace his circuit to the other Pueblos.

I have frequently mentioned the chicha—the national beverage
of these countries, the naming of which instantly brightens the gloomiest
face and relaxes the severest brow. It is but fair that I should give
some information as to its preparation, though it be at the risk of
shocking delicate minds.

In the first place, I have to say that this .chicha must not be
confounded with the sour: beverage made from apples, which Ger-
staecker encountered among the Araucanians, and which, on due
consideration, is as much at home on the Rhine and the Main as in
the South of Chile. Ohno! La nuestra -chicha is made of the golden
grains of Indian corn, which, bruised and moistened, are brought to
a state of fermentation; but it is just this process of bruising and
moistening which gives to 1t its peculiar national distinction, although
the grinding-stones are to be found wherever human beings are, In
short, they are no other than the masticatory organs of the ladies—
in our case, of the Indian ladies. About the time of a festival, on
passing by the always open doors of the cottages, you are sure to
find three or four women (not always of the youngest or prettiest)

want of funds, he urged the Government to a more liberal dispensation of baronetcies,
and, in the interest of the Asylum, to bestow them rather on open hands than on
astute heads; and that, in consequence of it, the contributions came in so plentifully
‘que nao tinha maos a medir,” that is, that he had not hands enough to relieve them
all, as every coflee-planter, and slave or carne-seca dealer who had amassed wealth, was
anxious to contribute his mite—to the Lunatic Asylum.



7wer

THE MOJOS INDIANS. 197

squatting and cowering round a large trough made out of one piece
of wood. They are busily engaged in chewing the hard grains, which
they take out of calabashes beside them, and in spitting them, after
sound mastication, into the trough.

This thick mass, which is thinned with water, is poured into large
carthen jars and left to ferment, which it usually begins to do within
a very short time. How long this process should continue, in order

CAPITAO PAY, CHIEFTAIN OF TILE CAYOWA INDIANS.

to impart the particular flavour affected by Bolivian gourmands, or when
and how it must be filtered, to separate stray grains from it, I am
unable to say. Thinking it unlikely that the lovely drink would find
many votaries in Europe, I did not inquire after the further details
of its preparation.

However, it is an interesting fact that not only the half-wild



198 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

inhabitants of the Pueblos on the Mamoré, but even the denizens of
the more civilised trading towns, like Cochabamba, cannot do without
the chicha, though there is no lack of either refreshing or intoxicating
drinks, from the innumerable lemonades and refrescos to the most
ardent spirits. Beer alone, when its brewing shall have reached the
foot of the Andes, may contest the supremacy of the chicha; but it
must be of a weak, agreeable quality, not the strong ale or porter of
English export, which, overcoming all the difficulties of transport,
has already found its way there.

CAPITAO VEI-BANG, CHIEF OF THE COROADOS.

As to the taste of the chicha (for, a victim to my love of
science, I tried the yellowish, turbid, slightly-pearling liquid—though
only after having carefully ascertained that there were no fragments
of grinders, but only bruised grains, at the bottom of my calabash),
it reminded me of weak cider with the slightest addition of starch;
and possibly, when one succeeds in forgetting all about its prepara-
tion, it may not be quite so objectionable as the warm water of the

ore,


THE MOJOS INDIANS. 199

river, or the thick water of the corridges, or pools, which are full of
organic matter of all kinds.

Of course nothing scems easier or simpler than the idea of doing
the bruising of the grains in a mortar, or with a couple of cylinders ;
but an indescribable smile curls the lip of the true Bolivian when
you are ingenuous enough to propose such a thing. With a pityig
shrug of the shoulders, he will inform you that. that was tried
long ago, and that chicha prepared thus “ artificialmente” was destitute
of all savouriness,—-in fact, was not chicha. And, indeed, who knows
whether he be not right, and whether fermentation brought about
by different means does not produce different effects? ‘Into the
innermost secrets of Nature no created spirit as yet has penetrated ;”
and even the celebrated automatic duck of the late Hofrath Beireis
may have awakened dubious thoughts in some of his fellow-professors,
gifted with more delicate smelling-organs than the rest, as to the
final result of its artificial apparatus of digestion.

The tenacity with which the Bolivians cleave to their old ways
in such matters is evidenced by the following narrative of fact. Some
years back a Frenchman erected at Santa Cruz de la Sierra a very
simple chocolate mill. Notwithstanding the large consumption of the
article, the cacdo beans used to be bruised by the poor Indian women,
in wooden troughs, with the aid of common field-stones:—a mode
which, besides being imperfect and laborious, involved the loss of
time. Anywhere else the enterprise could not have failed to be a
splendid success; but not so in Bolivia. The man was totally ruined.
Nobody would buy his chocolate, for it was said to cause—risum
teneatis !—violent colics, through the novelty of its ‘‘artificial” pre-
paration ; and the Indian women have therefore to go on with their
Sisyphean work.

After these culinary diversions, let us return to the Missions, of
which there are fifteen in the Departamento del Beni, inhabited by
seven different tribes. Three of these, the Canichanas, Cayuabas, and
Mobimas, live in one Pueblo each; while the four others, the Maropas,
Baurés, Itonamas, and Mojos, have three or four villages each.
Giving an average number of 2,000 souls to each Mission, we have
a total of 30,000 Indian inhabitants of the Department.

In spite of the external similarity of the several tribes in respect



200- THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

of dress, customs, and habits—results probably due to Jesuit culture—
there are marked distinctions which have resisted effacement. Thus
the Cayuabas of Exaltacion, who evidently have suffered most from
the corrupting influence of the white man, are still renowned as the
boldest’ and hardiest boatmen; while the’Canichanas of S. Pedro, who
from the first struck ° tis‘ by ‘their ~ sullenly-stern behaviour and
Mongolian type, are ‘said to have given more trouble to the Reverend
Fathers than all the rest, and to have occasionally indulged, up to a
very recent date, in their. anthropophagous appetites, to which they
sacrificed more than one messenger from adjoining Missions, as he
wendéd ‘his weary way over the’lonely campos.

“; The *Mobinias, at S. Ana, near Exaltacion, arrest attention by
their’ tall figures: Notably the squaws, as they stride powerfully:
along in‘ théir white camisetas, might easily originate fables like those
respeéting the < giants of Patagonia; while among the Mojos* at
Trinidad, Loreto, 8. Ignacio, and §. Javier, there are to be found,
not only figures of faultless symmetry and beauty, but the truest, the
faithfullest, and the kindest of hearts.

Am illustrative vocabulary of the various languages is given in
the annexed table; and, regarding pronunciation, I have to remark
that the spelling is the German one.

For the outward appearance and the physiognomical and other
points of interest of these Indians, I refer to the illustrations. A
sketch, be it never so hasty, cannot fail to impart a better idea of
them ‘than any verbal description. The two last sketches represent
the chieftains of the Cayowas and the Coroados of the Province of
Parana; and they may be regarded with greater interest from the fact
that’ the Guaranis and their kindred, the Cayowds of the ‘district
called Guayra (now included in Parana), even so far back as the
end’ of ‘the sixteenth century, were the willing pupils of thé Jesuits,
as the Mojos became atterwards. The warlike Coroados, of an opposite
character, ‘at’ the same period. were the trusty allies of the white
settlers -of the Province of S. Paul, helping them in their slave-
robbing expeditions and ‘in the destruction of the Missions -of the

* In the Amazon Valley all Indians coming from the Bolivian Missions , are

designated by thé name of: Mojos; probably because the first crews that were seen
there in their peculiar bast shirts belonged to this tribe.



1. College of Jesuits. 2. Church. 3. Campanile, 4. Habitations of Indiaus round the Plaza,
ANCIENT MISSION OF EXALTACION (Manor).





THE MOJOS INDIANS. 201

Jesuits ; who, in consequence of these repeated attacks, retired farther
to the South, to the shores of the Uruguay and the Parana, taking
their disciples with them. After numerous conflicts with the advancing
tide of culture, the Coroados were outlawed by the Portuguese Govern-
ment; and only within the last twenty-five years have some of their
hordes deigned to live with the hated white man on any other footing
than that of war, and to take up their abode in the Aldeamentos,
or Indian settlements administered by the Governmert. In some of

these,—such as San Ignacio, and Nossa Senhora do Pirapé, built on
the sites of the Missions destroyed by the Paulistas, in 1630; and
Sao Pedro d’Aleantara on the Tibagy,--and in the heart of the endless
region of primeval forest lying between the Tieté and the Iguassi, I
was enabled to institute comparisons between the several tribes there
living beside one another, in peace though not in amity; and there
were these likenesses taken.

With the aid of the still visible elevations of the surface, attesting
the remains of the ruined Pisé walls—which, like the ruins of Villa
Rica on the Ivahy, were partly enveloped with close vegetation—we
could easily construct the plan on which these several Missions were
laid out; and it apparently was adopted, with few variations, in all of
them: In the centre a large square, with the church and the collegio
on one side, and the low Indian cottages disposed in long rectangular
streets all around it; the strict regularity of the whole harmonizing
well with the severe military discipline maintained therein. Only on
the Paranapanema did we observe a peculiarity, of which the Bolivian
Missions showed no trace—the remains of walls and trenches, slight
fortifications evidently necessitated by the repeated attacks of the
Paulistas.

When we come to review all that has been advanced on this
subject, the achievements of the Jesuits cannot but strike us as having
been grand and admirable, let their aims have been never so ambitious
and selfish, and the means they employed never so immoral and
disloyal. The degree of success effected by them appears the grander
when contrasted with the existing condition of things under the
modern Brazilian and Bolivian clergy. Indifferent as are the Govern-
ments to the union of the diffused remains of the aboriginal inhabitants,
if they desire to incite them to productive activity and to save them



202 THE AMAZON AND MADEIRA RIVERS.

from complete extinction, recourse must again be had to the Italian
Capuchin monks as missionaries; for there is not a single one, out
of the many fat native bonzes who are to be found strolling idly
through the streets of the towns, and scandalising all true Christians
with the laxity of their lives, who would consent to exchange his
rich prebend for the hard life of an Indian aldeamento.



VOCABULARY OF INDIAN DIALECTS CURRENT IN THE BENI

DEPARTMENT OF BOLIVIA.

z l

| BMOJOS. | mae ITONAMA. | ; MAROPA.

At Trinidad; N.S | Atn es cee At 8. Ramon;’ ie re ee sh sac At Reyes; and  GUARANI.

de Loreto; §.lgnacio; N.6. del paatee and 8. M. Magdalena; At S. Pedro. | At S. Anna, At Exaltacion. S. Borja.

and 8. Javier. 8. Joaquim. | and 8. José.

Man Hiro Kiritian Umo Enacu Itilacua Cratasi Uni Aba
Woman | Eseno Yamake Caneca Ikegahui Cutscha Cratalorane Yutscha Suna
Head Nutchuti Upatchi Utschu Eueucu Bamacua Nahuaracama Mapo , Acang
Cheek: Numiro Urutaratchi Papapana Eikokena Kinto Tribuju Tamo Tatipi
Eyes Nuuki Tucutchi Teatschi Eutot Sora Niyoco Huiro Teso
Ear Nutchoka Taitatatschi Mochtodo Eucomete Lototo lradike Paoki Apigaqua <i
Hand Nubupe Umitchi Malaca Eutijle Sojpan | Daru Muipata Mbo S
Sun Saatche Huapuito Apatsche Nicojli Tinno | Nharaman Vari Quaraci =
Moon. Coche | Panato Tiacaca Nimilacu | Yetso Irare Oche Yaci gS
Water Une Acum Huanuve Nese | Touni Ikita Jene Y
Lire Yucu | Isse Bari Nitschucu Vée Idore Tsehii Tata x
Mountain Mari | Pecun Iti Coméé Tschampandi| Iruretui Matchiva Ibiti :
Bow Eziporoku | Parami | Hualichkit Niescutop Tanilo Tranpwi Canati Guirapa
Arrow Takirikire Tschininie Tschere Itschuhuera | Tulpaendi Trabibiki Pia Hui
Young Amoperu Isohuem | Tiétié Ecokelege | Ovenionca Mamihuasi Huekehue Cunumbugu
Old | Etschasi Itaracun Viayachne Emmara Bijau Tratakasi Tschaita Tuya
o/) Nuti Huaya | Achni Ojale Incla Areai Ka Ndi-ni
He Ema Aricau | Oni Enjale Tcolo Are Aa | Ae
Give me | Peeracano Miapatschi Macuno Sitchite Caijleca Piboloire Eki ahue Emboocho
To eat Pinike Cahuara Ape | Alema Caiki Panii Pihue Acaru
To sleep | Migue Huatschiaé Conejna Agaja Oroki Pibilii Ochahuan Ake
L will Pivoro Mosi tschacum | Itschavaneve | Huarehua | Jirampana Orichuhueuhua Akekia Potari
L will not | Voi-pivoro Masi tschacum | Huatschi- | Nolmach éhua-| Cai-jiram- Yeitschuenhua| Oje amakia | Ndaypotari

tschvaco | éréhu panaaca

to
=
ow



APPENDIX.

—> ~

THE SURVEYS—THE HYDROGRAPHICAL, HYPSOMETRICAL, AND
STATISTICAL RESULTS—HOW OBTAINED.

THoven in a few years puffing locomotives will be speeding through them, the districts
we explored have till now been so detached from communication with the rest of the
world, and have, notwithstanding their natural wealth, partaken so little of the
influence exercised by commerce over the course of universal history, that it is likely
more than one of our readers has had to refer to the map, to call to mind the exact
position of the different points in the great Amazon Basin, or the Madeira, or the
Mamoré Valley.

Nevertheless, with the opening of better means of intercourse, and with the
exportation of their produce, these countries will acquire greater importance in the
future. They should evoke at least as much interest as does Central Africa, for
instance ; which again and again attracts explorers and interests readers. Although,
therefore, the results of our voyage may be incomplete in more respects than one, and
though our investigations frequently were hurried, yet they may not be altogether
devoid of interest, on the score of this having been the first expedition to these regions
undertaken of late years. I now proceed to give a short summary of the astronomical,
hydrographical, hypsometrical, and statistical results obtained.

The astronomical observations were made in the following way :—

Two ship’s chronometers (by Poole, of London) having proved defective at Manéos,
and former explorations having convinced us that these delicate instruments suffer
materially, not only from their short transport on land, but also from the shocks and
rockings of the rudder-boats, which soon disqualify them for determination of longi-
tude, we resolved to base our calculations on observations of lunar distances. Though
these (we always made two of them on important occasions) did not all prove to be of
equal exactitude, we still had enough to ascertain beyond doubt the geographical
situation of the chief line.

The latitudes were determined by the altitude of the sun and of the stars, taken
almost wherever we halted, the nightly observations being greatly favoured by the
cloudless serenity of the sky during the dry season. ‘The instruments used were an
excellent cercle de reflexion by Casella, and two sextants with artificial horizons ; the one
used in first line being a mereury horizon.

Between the principal points of the expanse of water thus astronomically deter-
mined, the detail of the river-course was obtained by means of a micrometer by Rochon
and a prismatic compass.

An exact triangulation, extending over the whole width of the river, was necessarily
out of the question, even if we could have found time for the measuring, properly so
called, since the setting up of observatories and of trigonometrical signals in the dense
forest, with the limited staff at our disposal, would have required the preparation of
years.

The levelling was gencrally done barometrically, with two aneroid barometers and
a hypsometer (by the temperature of boiling water), and on the chief breaks the
difference was, besides, directly measured by the levelling instrument.


APPENDIX.

205

Exact transverse sections of the whole river, and measurings of its velocity for the
purpose of calculating the quantity of the water, were taken on many points; and the
deepest channel was fathomed throughout the explored course.

For the principal objects of our exploration, that is, for the comparative estimates
of expenditure for a railroad along its shore, and for canalisation of the river, and
for the completion and rectification of the geographical maps, this mode of survey

was thoroughly adequate ;

by the Brazilian Government to Colonel G. 12. Church was based and worked.
The results of the measurings are as follows :—

South Latitude.
Names of the Points.

LoxcirupE AND LAtitupE oF THE Principat Pornts.

and on the results so obtained the concession granted

West Longitude from

Rio de Janeino.

On the Lower Madcira—Murassuttiba . 1  Deetot a omen 0
= = Tlha das Baétas ; oP alts 28" Ul
| _ “ Espirito Santo ; Gp oe 20
| 7 a Crato . F 4 5, SIRE Bi OES
| - Domingo Leigue . Sense esol 4) (0
On the Upper Madeira—Rapid of Santo Antonio . 8° 49' 2" 6 D1 E25 Sy
| ro A Fall of Theotonio . 5 RP Gap aA @ eens OMNI
” ” Rapid of Morrinhos 5 op Tk aR 21° 36 30”
FF - Mouth of the Jaciparané. 9° 10° 9" 0 21° 42’ 20’
” 66 Caldeirzo do Inferno 5 YP TG GIB @ Qiliee Bo 2am
- : Fall of Girao ; J Py eas 9) Os fe PF
| o - Rapid of Tres Irmios
a J Rapid of Paredao . pe mesty S7r. ov OP 5 NGI. alti
3 ’ Rapid of Pederneira yen BR eg! ew) 2 220 mel Om
i Mouth of the Abuna
; 0 Rapid of Ardras. 5 OP i i ype TNs) On
os ; Rapid of Periqvitos = iy
re Fy, Fall of Ribeirao . » Ne. iY aM i 99° BaSeets Ou
S FF, Rapid of Madeira 4
- F Mouth of the Beni . , iP Oy) SEP SOY Day"
3 4 Rapid of Lages
3 é Rapid of Pao Grande
Wy - Fall of Bananeira . =
Af . Rapid of Guajara Merim. 10° 44° 32" 8 99°) wedi X40
| 2. Distances Berween THE Principat Ports.
Length in
Fxtreme Points. Statute Miles.
Developed length of the river-course from the mouth of the Madeira to
Santo Antonio 6560
30 o - Santo Antonio to Guajaré Merim : 2254
ef fi: re Guajara Merim to the mouth of the Meimons 1024
| 3 he nf the mouth of the Mamoré to Exaltacion . 180
| Exaltacion to Trinidad. 188
| The ‘total of these distances, 2,412 miles, is the length of the journey, ‘there and
| back, made by the expedition in canoes,



206 APPENDIX.

8. ALTITUDE oF THE Princrpan Points ABovE THE SRA-LEVEL.

(N.B.—Reduced on the Low Level of the River.)

Name of the Points. Altitude above Sea-level in English Feet.
Town of Serpa, on the Amazon : : : : 3 . 49
Mouth of the Madeira. . . : : 3 - . 69
Manicoré on the Lower Madeira cic a : ; . oe OY
Baétas 7 . . . . 5 i > Isil
Tres Casas _,, > . ‘ 3 ; : - 164
Ilha do Salomao op . . ; . P oe ees
Domingo Leigue * . : . ; ; relia
Mouth of the Jammary ,, ‘ 3 : . . . 184
Rapid of Santo Antonio (below the break) : ’ 5 - 200
Fall of Theotonio i ; , . . 5 Bi?
Rapid of Morrinhos - d : 4 2 . 288
Caldeiraio do Inferno ? . b > dx)
Fall of Girio me 4 é : i 5 aes)
Mouth of the Beni . F é % ; 5 F . - 402
Fall of Bananeiras (below the break) . ; . 5 . 450
Rapid of Guajaré Merim ri ‘ , ; | - 475
Mouth of the Mamoré . . J : : ‘ . . 493
Level of the Mamoré at Exaltacion . : ; : , . 499

4. DirFerENcr or Leven anp Exrenr or rue Principat Farts anp Rapins.

Name of the Rapid. Difference of Level. Length of the Rapid.
English Feet. Yards.
Santo Antonio ‘ . . ‘ 3°93 300
Theotonio (principal break) ; 5 26°25 110—300
Caldeirao do Inferno ; . . 4 440
Girao : : . , ‘ ; 26:25 770
Paredio . : é : : : 35 600
Pederneira ; : . . 4 3:31 280
Ardras. : : 1 . . 3°41 770
Ribeiréo (principal break) . ; ; 13°15 440
Madeira . é é ; f : 6°72 980
Lages : c : : ; z 6°72 820
Pao Grande : ; H ; : 6°56 440
Bananeiras (principal break) A c 19°7 550
Guajara Guasst ; . ; : 35 500

The slope represented: by eighteen larger and twenty-eight smaller rapids* is
2273 feet in an extent of 12} miles. The total difference of level between Santo
Antonio and Guajara being 272 feet, 272 ft.—2274 ft.— 444 feet; which yields the slope
of the smooths between the rapids.

* The boatmen on the Madeira usually distinguish a Rapid by cabega, corpo, e rabo; that is, head,
body, and tail.

ba


eae

APPENDIX. 207

5, Wiprn or tae River, Derry, anp GENERAL Proportion oF THE SLopEs.

Slope.
1) Slope of the Mamoré between Exaltacion and the mouth . 1: 82,104
2) - Madeira from the mouth of the Mamoré to Guajara 1: 80,000
BAG ea i Guajaré to Santo Antonio 1: 6,803
4) - Nv Santo Antonio to the mouth 1: 26,490
Depth of the deepest Channel at Low Level. Feet.
1) Mamoré at the mouth (maximum) . : ‘ . é { va 33
2) f on the reef of Matucdre (minimum) : : ; 24
3) Madeira between the.mouth of the Mamoré and Coser (cnaietan) : Ste BY
4) .. - ny! (minimum). . . 42
5) Beni at the mouth 3 - : : ‘ : | 2 60
6) Madeira, greatest depth above Theotonio. : é : ' 0 ce DY
7) 3 FI at Sapucaia Oroca 4 APJ
8) » on the reefs of Uroa (shallowest part of the dtagueht | 8 : 44
Width of the Rivers. Yards,
1) Mamoré, at the mouth, at low water . : : 9 5 9 ero28
» at high water . é F : : : 7820
2) Guaporé, at the mouth, at low water : : : : ; 4 = 550
Ks », at high water : ; ; ’ ; : ar (i)
3) Madeira, average width above the rapids : J : 5 ‘ . 480
4) 3 minimum of width within the rapids . 5 : a . 380
En maximum F : z . 7 . 2,200
5) A$ below the rapids a Sapuca aia Oroca ; 5 : 3 . 800
6) Beni. 3 ; 7 2 : : c 4 3 . ale Oe

6. Exrevarion or THe Banxs—DirFerENcE or LEVEL BETWEEN Hicu anp Low
WATER—QUANTITIES OF WATER.

Near Exaltacion the banks of the Mamoré rise on an average to 43 feet above
low water level; and this is also about the height of the floods; but at its mouth the
shores rise only to about 26 feet, and are inundated far and wide by the floods which
there usually reach 30 feet in height.

Ou the Madeira the elevation of the banks varies considerably within the region
of the rapids; and so do the high and low water levels. Immediately above each
rapid they sink to about 6} to 10 feet ; immediately below they rise to a maximum.

On the Lower Madeira the normal elevation of the banks is 28 feet above low
water, that is, a trifle less than high water level. At some places, however, as at
Sapucaia Oroca, the difference between flood and low water level is 40 feet; the
elevation of the right shore 48 feet, and that of the left 33 feet above low water.

The quantities of water conveyed per second by the Madeira and its confluents at
different levels are as follow :—

Low Water Medium Water Flood

Level. Level. Level.
Cubic Feet. Cubic Feet. Cubic Feet.
Guaporé, at the mouth . ‘ 5 . 23,415 66,270 j 180,818
Mamoré _ i 29,500 89,350 248,060
Madeira, at the apper Ena of the rapids ; 52,900 152,212 428,876
Beni, at the mouth P : 48,842 . 163,412 463,000

Madeira, below the rapids at Sapuc aia Oroca 146,278 517,090 1,351,065



208 APPENDIX.

By way of comparison, I give the quantities conveyed per second by the Rhine near
Mannheim :—

Cubic Feet.

At low-water level . A 3 é ! ; ; . F 19,600
At medium-water level. . P A . a waa. dil 58,624
At high-water level ; ; a ‘ , a - 196,000

The surface of ground drained by the different rivers is, after the existing maps :—
: English Square Miles.

By the Guaporé .. ; ! ; : ‘ ’ : . 198,855
By the Mamoré . : 3 é ; 7 ; : . 199,468
By the Beni . ; . : ‘i 7 , ; ; - 141,320
By the Lower Madeira ‘ 7 a - . 220,175

754,818

Which shows clearly that the mighty Beni, until now, has been treated illiberally
by map-makers, though its origin in the high well-watered Cordillera, which also
supplies the Mamoré with a disproportionately great quantity of water as compared
with the Guaporé, ought to have been taken into account.

Though out of several proposals made by us for the improvement of the ways of
communication, only our plan for an economical railroad was finally adopted, the
estimates of the other projects may be of some interest to scientific readers. They
were :—

1) The construction’ of inclined planes, at all the larger rapids, to track the
vessels; such as are in use in North America and Prussia.

2) The canalisation of the river with sluices.

3) The construction of a railroad along the bank.

The expenditure required for the first project (which, with a considerably increased
trade, might soon have proved insufficient) was estimated at 900,000 milreis, or
2,340,000 francs. ‘he second, the execution of which would have been attended with
almost insurmountable difficulties, was estimated at 21,000,000 milreis, or 54,600,000
francs; and the third, which actually has been begun, at 8,500,000 milreis, or
22,100,000 franes.

As the length of the railroad to be constructed, with a minimum of gauge, is only
about 174 miles (on easy surface, on the whole), the estimate may appear rather
high, even for Brazil; but in thinly-peopled countries, hitherto entirely cut off from the
rest of the world, and into which it will be necessary to import everything, with the
exception of the timber, and workmen especially, the cost of various operations,
particularly of constructive works like bridges, will swell to enormous sums.

In the total absence of reliable official returns, the number of souls living along the
main river and near the extensive lake-like lateral branches (¢.g. the Uaupés) can be
estimated only roughly; and we place it between 5,000 and 6,000, the half-civilised
Mundruetis and Miras included.

They subsist chiefly by the preparation of India-rubber, the collection of Paré nuts,
and other fruit of the forests, and on the produce of small cacéo and tobacco plantations.
Therefore supplies of provisions of all kinds (even of the mandioca root, which grows
with scarcely any trouble) fail to be obtained in sufficient quantities in the most fertile
valley in the world, and must be imported from afar.

Jor the singularity of the fact, I mention here that an algucire of mandioca flour
(about one and a third bushels) costs, at Rio de Janeiro and Pard, 2—3 milreis
(As. 6d. to 6s. 9d.) ; in Bolivia 1 (2s. 8d.); and on the Madeira 12—14 (27s. to 31s. 6d.)
Proportionately high prices affect other products, the sugar-cane to wit, which would
thrive excellently. If the caoutchouc industry may be called a gold mine, agriculture
would prove equally remunevative as it did in California at the time of the gold fever.

heme


APPENDIX. 209

Cattle breeding, with the exception of the very modest beginnings on the natural
campos of Crato, has been quite unknown on the Madeira, and probably will continue
so for some time to come. There are immense districts without an ox, or a cow, or a
horse, or a mule, or a sheep, or a goat. Aven a pig is a rare sight. Dogs and
fowls only are to be seen near the cottages, usually associated with a crowd of the
easily-tamed inhabitants of the woods—parrots, toucans, monkeys, several rodents,
and even bristly peccaries. And yet the want of animal food is felt acutely by the
dense population of the Amazon Valley, and will be daily aggravated by the
increasing immigration of Europeans, who do not relish the eternal fish-and-farina
dishes.*

On the campos of the Mamoré, Upper Beni, Ttonama and Machupo, on the grassy
plains oceupied by the fifteen Missions, cattle thrive so plentifully that, with proper
management, they would easily supply the whole country, as soon as the Madeira
railroad shall have opened a market for them in the Amazon Valley; and the recently-
started National Bolivian Navigation Company, as well as the yailroad, may reckon on
at least this considerable trade.

Besides hides, tallow, dried meat, live stock, sugar, brandy, and cacao, the
invaluable Peruvian bark also will then take its way down the Madeira to Para,
and the economical monstrosity of sending it to Europe over the Oordillera and
round Cape Horn will cease. And the same observation applies to the produce of the
rich mines of Bolivia; of which, by the way, only those of Potosi (the richest silver
mines in the world) and the newly-discovered ones of Caracélest are worked and doing
fairly, while the excellent copper mines of Coro-coro are totally neglected. These
crooked ways, of which the example of the Peruvian bark is sufficient evidence,
injuriously affect not only the exports of the country, but also the import of European
and North American goods; which are as indispensable to Bolivia as to the rest of
South America. 3

Let us (by way of illustration) follow them from some European port to their place
of destination, La Paz, Cochabamba, Sucre, or Santa Cruz de la Sierra. Having
arrived, after a sea voyage of eighty or ninety days, at the Peruvian port of Arica,
and landed as usual with average (as it cannot be otherwise with the defective arrange-
ments there), they have first to pass the custom-house of the “ Sister-Republic,” which,
in consideration of the sum of 500,000 dollars anuually paid to Bolivia, has (by the
treaty of 1865) acquired the right of levying heavy taxes on all classes of goods (about
30 per cent. ad valorem). From Arica they are carried by the railway to Tacna, where
they are packed up in parcels that must not weigh more than 120 or 140 lbs.; and
thence by beasts of burden over the steepest and roughest mountain-paths, in the
most troublesome and tedious way, to Tia Paz. Arrived there, well shaken and,
perhaps, saturated, the cost of the goods has amounted to 150 dollars, or about £30, per
ton; and to reach Cochabamba, or Sucre, or Santa Cruz de la Sierra, costs about half
as much more. All these towns, however, are situated near affluents of the Amazon,
and will be accessible from its mouth in an easier manner, in a shorter time, and at
half the expense, as soon as the short railway along the rapids of the Madeira is

completed. 7)
The following is a tabular statement of the trade to and from Bolivia :—
]mports. & | Imports. £
From England. . 528,000 From Argentine Republic 64,000
», France : . 264,000 Pe enine , .  §0,000
» Germany . . 224,000 » Brazil : . 66,000
” “United States . 72,000 | “61,088,000

* Fish-Lapland was the title Destowed on these countries by our factotum, Mr. O. v. Sch. ;
+ It is a well-known fact that in the province of Alto-Pera (the present Bolivia) the Spaniards
worked in 10,200 places for the silver ore.

Lr



RE as

210 APPENDIX.
Exports & Exports. £
Silver . : . 720,000 Vieuna and alpaca wool 60,000
Peruvian bark. . -160,000 Tin. : . : 40,000
Copper , . . 128,000 Coffee . 5 A , 6,000
Coca . ; . . 128,000 Tallow and hides . 2,000
Gold . , . . 80,000

£1,324,000

From this it will be seen that the imports have been considerably liquidated by the
produce of the mines.* With improved ways of communication, a country, whose
population is increasing so rapidlyt without any immigration from without, and
which owns provinces of surprising fertility, may well cover the imports independently
of the mines.

Several attempts, or rather projects, have been made to force the barriers, and to
open the country to commerce. Thus, the railroad which runs from Buenos Ayres
towards the north (extended to Cordova now) will, by its contemplated prolongation to
Tujui, connect the Southern part of Bolivia with that important harbour at the mouth
of the River Plate; and another project has been mooted of opening a way by the
Pileomayo (navigable though it be only during the rainy season) to Asuncion in
Paraguay, where the magnificent river of that name will offer the best of all media of
communication.

A third project, the execution of which has been begun in right good earnest in the
face of immense difficulties, is the railroad from the Peruvian port of Islay, by way of
Arequipa, to Puno on the ‘Titicaca Lake. It may ultimately become a rival to the
Madeira Railroad; yet, as they will touch Bolivia at nearly diametrically opposite
points, and as moreover the construction of a railroad over the wild, rugged mountain
range,t with tunnels, viaducts, and galleries, will involve the labour of scores of years
in these countries—during which time the Madeira line will be at work and gathering
its harvest, though difficulties will not be spared to it either—the latter may well be
recommended to the respective Governments and to the commercial world in general,
especially since the agricultural produce of the fertile plains on the Madeira and its
affluents will always go by the Amazon.

Thus before the powerful influence of steam will one barrier after another fall; and
ere the lapse of another century iron rails will penetrate to the remotest corner of the
new continent, now inhabited by wild tribes whose names even are unknown to us ;
from the forest-covered Amazon Basin down to the grassy plains of the Gran Chaco, to
the retreat of the grim Pampas Indians, and to stony Patagonia; and the mixed
population, which will have sprung up meanwhile, will be united to the rest of the
world by the strong ties of interest and of commerce. But the red-skinned native of
pure blood will have become a myth; the world will be the poorer for many an idyll ;
but, on the whole, mankind will have achieved a vast stride in the career of Progress.

* In the last eighteen months, the produce of the silver mines of Potosi and Caracéles has increased
so largely that in 1872 it amounted to £1,350,000.
+ Lhe population of Bolivia amounted, in the first year after the Declaration of Independence, that is in

1826 d a 3 0 9 to 997,427
It has since progressed thus— 1831 ‘ " a 5 3 1,087,792
1836 ; . . : . ogy 1,181,169
1841 : . 4 ; : , 1,277,531
1846 ; . : ; Delia 31596
1851 . ; . . 4 1,448,196
1859 ; ; ; . . 4, 1,950,000
1870 2,750,000

} The pass of Tacora, between Arequipa and Puno, is 15,000 feet above the level of the sea.

PKINTED BY VIRTUE AND CO., CITY ROAD, LONDON









IAIN

